18.1 And so like a young initiate who mastered the Vedas, like a trader who turned a quick profit,Or
like a royal warrior who conquered a hostile army, a success, Nanda approached the
Guru.

18.2 For it is pleasant, at a time when wisdom has been fully realized, for teacher to see student,
and for student to see teacher,[Each thinking], “Your toil has rewarded me”; for which
same reason the wish to see [Nanda] arose in the Sage.

18.3 Thus is a noble person obliged to pay respect, to his face, to the one through whom he
has acquired distinction.Even a noble person who retains the taint of redness is so obliged,
out of gratitude: How much more is one with no red taint, all pride having perished?

18.4 For when devotion springs from an agenda or desire, there it remains rooted;But when a
person has love and devotion for dharma, that person is steeped to the core in tranquillity.

18.5 And so, a glowing gold in his yellow-red robe, he bowed his head to the GuruLike a karnikāra
tree, with an outburst of ruddy shoots, and a glorious blaze of flowers, nodding in
the wind.

18.6 Then, as a manifestation of his individual merit as a student and, indeed, of the great
Sage’s merit as a teacher,And not out of pride, he described his own accomplishment of the
work that has to be done:

18.7 “The splinter of a view, that had penetrated to my core, O Mighty One, was paining me intensely,
being very sharp;Via the jaws of the pincers of your words – by means of a means
and by way of a mouth – it was pulled out of me, as a splinter is removed by a surgeon.

18.8 A doubt, by which I fell into a state of hesitant questioning, O One Beyond Doubt, has
been eradicated in me –Through your teaching I have arrived at a true path like a straggler,
under a good guide, getting on the road.

18.9 With senses ruled by relishing, I madly drank the drug of love;Its action was blocked in
me by the antidote of your words, as a deadly poison is by a great remedy.

18.10 Rebirth is over, O Refuter of Rebirth! I am dwelling as one with observance of true dharma.What
was for me to do, O Doer of the Necessary! is totally done. I am present in the
world without being of the world.

18.11 Having drunk from the milk-cow of your voice, whose udder is loving-kindness, whose lovely
dewlap is figures of speech, who is milked for true dharma, and whose horns are boldness
of expression,I am properly satisfied, O Most Excellent One, like a little calf that,
because of thirst, has drunk milk.

18.12 And so, O Sage, hear from me in brief what, through seeing, I have made my own.Though
you know it anyway, O All-knowing One, still I wish to mention how I have worked on myself.

18.13 For true freedom-loving people (however individual they are) when they hear of another
person’s plan that led to freedomWill happily work at [freedom] via that same path, like
sick men [hearing the plan] of one who became free from a disease.

18.14 In a birth, I perceive earth and the other elements, but in earth and those other elements,
I perceive no self at all.On that basis, there is no attachment in me to those elements;
my orientation is equal with regard to my body and outside.

18.15 Again, the five skandhas, beginning with the organized body, I see to be inconstant and
without substance,As well as unreal and life-negating; therefore I am free from those pernicious
[constructs].

18.16 Since I see for myself an arising and a vanishing in all situations in the realms of the
senses,Therefore, again, there is in me no clinging to those [aforementioned elements]
which are impermanent, impersonal, and unsatisfactory.

18.17 Again, on the grounds that I see the whole world as emerging and in the same moment passing
away, as having no essential meaning and not being as it ought to be,On these grounds,
because of meditation, [the world] is bound fast by my mind in such a way that there is
no flicker in me of ‘I am.’

18.18 There is all manner of indulging in the four sorts of food, but since I am not attached
to how I take food,Since when it comes to food I am not congealed or trussed up, I am free,
on that score, from three kinds of becoming.

18.19 In the daily round of dharma-practice since I am neither certain about nor bound in mind
to visual, auditory and other kinds of perception,And since through that [dharma-round]
I am graced by trailing equanimity, on that account I am detached and am free.”

18.20 After speaking thus, he prostrated himself on the ground with his whole body, out of deep
appreciation for the Guru;He looked like a great fallen column of gold tinged with red
sandalwood.

18.21 Then, after listening to him who had emerged already out of heedlessness, after hearing
his firmness and his testimonyAnd a clarity consistent with the gist of dharma, the Sage
boomed at him like a thundercloud:

18.22 “You who stands firm in the dharma which is loved by those who study it, stand up! Why
are you fallen with your head at my feet?The prostration does not honour me so much as this
surefootedness in the dharma.

18.23 Today, conqueror of yourself, you have truly gone forth, since you have thereby gained
sovereignty over yourself.For in a person who has conquered himself, going forth has worked;
whereas in an impulsive person whose senses remain unconquered, it has not.

18.24 Today you are possessed of purity of the highest order, in that your voice, body, and
mind are untainted,And in that, henceforward, my gentle friend, you will not again be confined
in the ungentle womb of unready slumber.

18.25 Listening [ears open] to the [truth] which is replete with listening, and with purpose,
today you stand surefooted in the dharma, in a manner that befits the listening tradition.For
a man equipped with listening [ears] who is wavering is like a swordsman lacking valour:
he is worthy of blame.

18.26 Ah! What firmness in you, who is a slave to objects no more, in that you have willed the
means of liberation.For, facing the end of existence in this world and thinking ‘I will
be finished,’ it is a fool who gives in to a state of quivering anxiety.

18.27 Happily, this meeting with the present moment, which is so hard to come by, is not being
wasted under the sway of ignorance.For a man who has been down goes up with difficulty,
like a turtle to a hole in a yoke, in the foaming sea.

18.28 Having conquered Māra, who is so hard to stop in battle, today, at the forefront of the
fight, you are a hero among men.For even a hero is not recognized as a hero who is beaten
by the foe-like faults.

18.29 Today, having extinguished the flaming fire of redness, happily, you will sleep well,
free of fever.For even on a fabulous bed he sleeps badly who is being burned in his mind by
the fires of affliction.

18.30 You used markedly to be mad about possessions; today, because you have stopped thirsting,
you are rich.For as long as a man in the world thirsts, however rich he may be, he is
always deprived.

18.31 Today you may fittingly proclaim that King Śuddhodana is your father.For it is not commendable
for a backslider, after falling from the dharma alighted on by ancestors, to proclaim
his lineage.

18.32 How great it is that you have reached the deepest tranquillity, like a man making it through
a wasteland and gaining possession of treasure.For everybody in the flux of saṁsāra
is afflicted by fear, just like a man in a wasteland.

18.33 ‘When shall I see Nanda settled, given over to the living of a forest beggar’s life?’,So
thinking, I had harboured from the start the desire to see you thus. What a wonderful sight
you are for me to behold!

18.34 For even an unlovely sort is a sight to behold when he is well-adorned with his own best
features.But a man who is full of the befouling faults, strikingly beautiful man though
he may be, is truly ugly.

18.35 Developed in you today is the real wisdom by which you have done, totally, the work you
had to do on yourself.For even a highly educated man lacks wisdom, if wisdom fails to show
in his practice of a better way.

18.36 So it is with seeing, among people with eyes open and with eyes closed.For when a man
lacks sight that is packed with intuition, though he has eyes, the Eye is not present in him.

18.37 Struck by calamity, stung to do something to combat suffering, the world exhausts itself
with work like ploughing;And yet it is ceaselessly revisited by that [suffering], to which,
using what you know, you today have put an end.

18.38 People in the world are impelled ever forward by thinking ‘There might be for me no hardship,
just happiness....’And yet [the world] does not know a means whereby that [happiness]
might come to be – that rarely attained [happiness] which you today have properly realized.”

18.39 While the Tathāgata told him this and more for his benefit Nanda remained firm in his
judgement and thinkingAnd was indifferent to plaudits or criticisms. With hands joined, he
spoke these words:

18.40 “Oh, how particular, O Seer of Particularities, is this compassion that you have shown
to me!Since I who was sunk, Glorious One, in the mire of love have been a reluctant refugee
from the terror of saṁsāra.

18.41 If not set free by you, a brother, a guide along a better way, a fruitful father, and
equally a mother,I would be done for; like a straggler dropped from a caravan, I would not
have made it.

18.42 Solitude is sweet for one who is calm and contented, who looks into and has learned what
is.Again, for one who is sober and shorn of conceits, for one who is detached in his decision-making,
dispassion is a pleasure.

18.43 And so, through squarely realising what is, through shaking off faults and coming to quiet,I
worry now neither about my own place, nor about the person there, nor about apsarases,
nor about gods.

18.44 For now that I have tasted this pure, peaceful happiness, my mind no longer hankers after
happiness born of desires –Just as the costliest earthly fare [cannot entice] a god who
has supped the heavenly nectar.

18.45 Alas, the world has its eyes closed by blind unconsciousness; it does not see utmost happiness
in a different robe.Flinging away lasting inner happiness, it exhausts itself so,
in pursuit of sensual happiness.

18.46 For just as a fool, having made it to a jewel mine, might leave the jewels and carry off
inferior crystals,So would one reject the highest happiness of full awakening and struggle
to gain sensual gratification.

18.47 Oh! high indeed, then, is the order of that desire to favour living beings which the Tathāgata
has, overflowing with benevolence:Since, O Sage, you throw away the highest-order
happiness of meditation and are consumed by your effort to stop others suffering.

18.48 How today could I possibly repay you, my compassionate Guru whose desire is others’ welfare,By
whom I was taken totally up and out of the foaming sea of becoming, like a man out
of a great ocean when his boat is being battered by waves?”

18.49 Then the Sage, hearing his well-founded words which signified the removal of all pollutants,Voiced,
as the Very Best of Speakers, these lines that none but a buddha, being ‘Sheer
Radiance,’ should voice:

18.50 “As a man of action who got the job done and who knows the primary task, none but you,
O crafty man!, should express this affirmation –Like a great trader, having crossed a wasteland
and got the goods, who affirms the work of a good guide.

18.51 An arhat, a man of action whose mind has come to quiet, knows the Buddha as a charioteer
of human steeds who needed taming:Not even a truth-seer appreciates the Buddha in this
manner: how much less does an ordinary person, however intelligent he may be?

18.52 This gratitude is fitting, again, in none but you whose mind has been liberated from the
dust of the passions and from darkness.For while dust prevails in the world, O man of gratitude!
real gratitude is a rare state of being.

18.53 O possessor of dharma! Since, because of abiding by dharma, you have skill in making it
your own and quiet confidence in me,I have something else to say to you. For you are surrendered
and devoted, and up to the task.

18.54 Walking the transcendent walk, you have done the work that needed to be done: in you,
there is not the slightest thing left to work on.From now on, my friend, go with compassion,
freeing up others who are pulled down into their troubles.

18.55 The lowest sort of man only ever sets to work for an object in this world. But a man in
the middle does work both for this world and for the world to come.A man in the middle,
I repeat, works for a result in the future. The superior type, however, tends towards abstention
from positive action.

18.56 But deemed to be higher than the highest in this world is he who, having realized the
supreme ultimate dharma,Desires, without worrying about the trouble to himself, to teach tranquillity
to others.

18.57 Therefore forgetting the work that needs to be done in this world on the self, do now,
stout soul, what can be done for others.Among beings who are wandering in the night, their
minds shrouded in darkness, let the lamp of this transmission be carried.

18.58 Just let the astonished people in the city say, while you are standing firm, voicing dharma-directions,‘Well!
What a wonder this is, that he who was a man of passion is preaching
liberation!’

18.59 Then, surely, when she hears of your steadfast mind with its chariots turned back from
sundry objects,Your wife following your example will also talk, to women at home, the talk
of dispassion.

18.60 For, with you showing constancy of the highest order, as you get to the bottom of what
is, she surely will not enjoy life in the palace,Just as the mind of an enlightened man does
not enjoy sensual pleasures when his mental state is tranquil and controlled, and his
thinking is detached and distinct.”

18.61 Thus spoke the Worthy One, the instructor whose compassion was of the highest order,Whose
words and equally whose feet [Nanda] had accepted, using his head;Then, at ease in himself,
his heart at peace, his task ended,He left the Sage’s side like an elephant free of
rut.

18.62 When the occasion arose he entered the town for begging and attracted the citizens’ gaze;Being
impartial towards gain, loss, comfort, discomfort, and the like and with his senses
composed, he was free of longing;And being there, in the moment, he talked of liberation
to people so inclined –Never putting down others on a wrong path or raising himself up.

18.63 This work is pregnant with the purpose of release: it is for cessation, not for titillation;It
is wrought out of the figurative expression of kāvya poetry in order to capture an
audience whose minds are on other things –For what I have written here not pertaining to
liberation, I have written in accordance with the conventions of kāvya poetry.This is through
asking myself how the bitter pill might be made pleasant to swallow, like bitter medicine
mixed with something sweet.

18.64 Seeing, in general, that the world is moved primarily by fondness for objects and is repelled
by liberation,I for whom liberation is paramount have told it here like it is, using
a kāvya poem as a pretext.Being aware of the deceit, take from this [verb-rooted dust]
what pertains to peace and not to idle pleasure.Then elemental dust, assuredly, shall yield
up abundant gold.

The 18th canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “Knowing & Affirming."

This is the work of a beggar, the respected teacher Aśvaghoṣa of Saketa, son of the noble Suvarṇākṣī,
crafter of epic poetry and talker of the great talk.

