17.1 Having thus had pointed out to him the path of what is, Nanda took that path of liberation.He
bowed with his whole being before the Guru and, with a view to abandoning the afflictions,
he made for the forest.

17.2 There he saw a clearing, a quiet glade, of soft deep-green grass,Kept secret by a silent
stream bearing water blue as beryl.

17.3 Having washed his feet there, Nanda, by a clean, auspicious, and splendid tree-root,Girded
on the intention to come undone, and sat with legs fully crossed.

17.4 By first directing the whole body up, and thus keeping his awareness turned towards the
body,And thus integrating in his person all the senses, there he threw himself all-out into
practice.

17.5 Wishing to practise, on that basis, the truth that has no gaps, and wishing to perform
practices that would be favourable to release,He moved, using mundane know-how, and stillness,
into the stage of readying of consciousness.

17.6 By holding firm, keeping direction of energy to the fore, by cutting out clinging and garnering
his energy,With consciousness that was calmed and contained, he came back to himself
and was not concerned about ends.

17.7 Though his judgement had been tempered and his soul inspired, now a vestige of desire,
arising out of habit,Made his mind turbid – like lightning striking water in a monsoon.

17.8 Being instantly aware of incompatibilities, he saw off that authoress of the dharma’s downfall,As
a man whose mind is seized by anger shoos away a loved but excitable woman, when
he is trying to concentrate.

17.9 Nanda re-directed his energy in order to still his mind, but as he did so an unhelpful
thought reasserted itself,As when, in a man intent on curing an illness, an acute symptom
suddenly reappears.

17.10 To fend against that he turned skillfully to a different factor, one favourable to his
practice,Like an enfeebled [prince] who seeks out a powerful protector when being overthrown
by a mighty rival.

17.11 For just as, by laying out fortifications and laying down the rod of the law, by banding
with friends and disbanding foes,A king gains hitherto ungained land, that is the very
policy towards practice of one who desires release.

17.12 Because, for a practitioner whose desire is release, the mind is his fortress, know-how
is his rod,The virtues are his friends, the faults are his foes; and liberation is the territory
he endeavours to reach.

17.13 Desiring release from the great net of suffering; desiring to enter into possession of
the pathways of release,Desiring to experience the supreme noble path; he got a bit of the
Eye, and came to quiet.

17.14 Heedless would be the unhoused man who, despite hearing the truth, housed the darkness
of ignorance;But since [Nanda] was a man of the bowl, a receptacle for liberation, he had
collected his mind into himself.

17.15 On the grounds of their being held together, their causality, and their inherent nature,
on the grounds of their flavour and their concrete imperfection,And on the grounds of their
tendency to spread out, he who was now contained in himself, carried out a methodical
investigation into things.

17.16 Desiring to examine its total material and immaterial substance, he investigated the body,And
he perceived the body to be impure, full of suffering, impermanent, without an owner,
and again, devoid of self.

17.17 For, on those grounds, on the grounds of impermanence and of emptiness, on the grounds
of absence of self, and of suffering,He, by the most excellent among mundane paths, caused
the tree of afflictions to shake.

17.18 Since everything, after not existing, now exists, and after existing it never exists again;And
since the world is causal, and has disappearance as a cause, therefore he understood
that the world is impermanent.

17.19 Insofar as a creature’s industry, motivated by bond-making or bond-breaking impulse,Is
dependent on a prescription, named “pleasure,” for counteracting pain, he saw, on that account,
that existence is suffering.

17.20 And insofar as separateness comes from doings, there being no doer or knower,And the activity
done arises out of a totality, he realised, on that account, that this world is empty.

17.21 Since the throng of humanity is passive, not autonomous, and no one exercises direct control
over the workings of the body,But states of being arise dependent on this and that,
he found, in that sense, that the world is devoid of self.

17.22 Then, like air in the hot season, got from fanning; like fire latent in wood, got from
rubbing;And like water under the ground, got from digging, that supramundane path which is
hard to reach, he reached:

17.23 As a bow of true knowledge, clad in the armour of awareness, standing up in a chariot
of pure practice of integrity,He took his stance for victory, ready to engage in battle his
enemies, the afflictions, who were ranged on the battlefield of his mind.

17.24 Then, unsheathing a sword that the limbs of awakening had honed, standing in the supreme
chariot of true motivation,With an army containing the elephants of the branches of the
path, he gradually penetrated the ranks of the afflictions.

17.25 With arrows made from the presence of mindfulness, instantly he shot those enemies whose
substance is upside-down-ness:He split apart four enemies, four causes of suffering, with
four arrows, each having its own range.

17.26 With the five incomparable noble powers, he broke five uncultivated areas of mental ground;And
with the eight true elephants which are the branches of the path, he drove away eight
elephants of fakery.

17.27 And so, having shaken off every vestige of the personality view, being free of doubt in
regard to the four truths,And knowing the score in regard to pure practice of integrity,
he attained the first fruit of dharma.

17.28 By glimpsing the noble foursome, and by being released from one portion of the afflictions;By
realising for himself what was specific to him as well as by witnessing the ease of
the sages;

17.29 Through the stability of his stillness and the constancy of his steadiness; through not
being altogether bewildered about the four truths;And through not being full of holes in
the supreme practice of integrity, he became free of doubt in the truth of dharma.

17.30 Released from the net of shabby views, seeing the world as it really is,He attained a
joy pregnant with knowing and his quiet certainty in the Guru deepened all the more.

17.31 For he who understands that the doing in this world is determined neither by any outside
cause nor by no cause,And who appreciates everything depending on everything: he sees the
ultimate noble dharma.

17.32 And he who sees as the greatest good the dharma that is peaceful, salutary, ageless, and
free of the red taint of passion,And who sees its teacher as the noblest of the noble:
he, as one who has got the Eye, is meeting Buddha.

17.33 When a healthy man has been freed from illness by salutary instruction, and he is aware
of his debt of gratitude,Just as he sees his healer in his mind’s eye, gratefully acknowledging
his benevolence and knowledge of his subject,

17.34 Exactly so is a finder of reality who, set free by the noble path, is the reality of being
noble:His body being a seeing Eye, he sees the Realised One, gratefully acknowledging
his benevolence and all-knowingness.

17.35 Sprung free from pernicious theories, seeing an end to becoming,And feeling horror for
the consequences of affliction, [Nanda] trembled not at death or hellish realms.

17.36 As full of skin, sinew, fat, blood, bone, and flesh; as full of hair and a mass of other
such unholy stuff,[Nanda] then observed the body to be; he looked into its essential reality,
and found not even an atom.

17.37 By the yoke of that very practice, he, firm in himself, minimised the duality of love
and hate;Being himself big across the chest, he made those two small, and so obtained the
second fruit in the noble dharma.

17.38 A small vestige of the great enemy, red passion, whose straining bow is impatient desire
and whose arrow is a fixed conception,He destroyed using weapons procured from the body
as it naturally is – using the darts of unpleasantness, weapons from the armoury of practice.

17.39 That gestating love-rival, malice, whose weapon is hatred and whose errant arrow is anger,He
slayed with the arrows of kindness, which are contained in a quiver of constancy and
released from the bow-string of patience.

17.40 And so the hero cut the three roots of shameful conduct using three seats of release,As
if three rival princes, bearing bows in the van of their armies, had been cut down by one
prince using three metal points.

17.41 In order to go entirely beyond the sphere of desire, he overpowered those enemies that
grab the heel,So that he attained, because of practice, the fruit of not returning, and stood
as if at the gateway to the citadel of nirvāṇa.

17.42 Distanced from desires and tainted things, containing ideas and containing thoughts,Born
of solitude and possessed of joy and ease, is the first stage of meditation, which he then
entered.

17.43 Released from the burning of the bonfire of desires, he derived great gladness from ease
in the act of meditating –Ease like a heat-exhausted man diving into water. Or like a pauper
coming into great wealth.

17.44 Even in that, he realised, ideas about aforesaid things, and thoughts about what is or
is not good,Are something not quieted, causing disturbance in the mind, and so he decided
to cut them out.

17.45 For, just as waves produce disturbance in a river bearing a steady flow of tranquil water,So
ideas, like waves of thought, disturb the water of the one-pointed mind.

17.46 And just as noises are a source of bother to one who is weary, and fallen fast asleep,So
do ideas become bothersome to one who is indulging in his original state of unitary awareness

17.47 And so gradually bereft of idea and thought, his mind tranquil from one-pointedness,He
realised the joy and ease born of balanced stillness – that inner wellbeing which is the
second stage of meditation.

17.48 And on reaching that stage, in which the mind is silent, he experienced an intense joy
that he had never experienced before.But here too he found a fault, in joy, just as he had
in ideas.

17.49 For when a man finds intense joy in anything, paradoxically, suffering for him is right
there.Hence, seeing the faults there in joy, he kept going up, into practice that goes beyond
joy.

17.50 And so experiencing the ease enjoyed by the noble ones, from non-attachment to joy, knowing
it totally, with his body,He remained indifferent, fully aware, and, having realised
the third stage of meditation, steady.

17.51 Since the ease here is beyond any ease, and there is no progression of ease beyond it,Therefore,
as a knower of higher and lower, he realised it as a condition of resplendent wholeness
which he deemed – in a friendly way – to be superlative.

17.52 Then, even in that stage of meditation, he found a fault: he saw it as better to be quiet,
not excited,Whereas his mind was fluctuating tirelessly because of ease circulating.

17.53 In excitement there is interference, and where there is interference there is suffering,Which
is why, insofar as ease is excitatory, devotees who are desirous of quiet give up
that ease.

17.54 Then, having already transcended ease and suffering, and emotional reactivity,He realised
the lucidity in which there is indifference and full awareness: thus, beyond suffering
and ease, is the fourth stage of meditation.

17.55 Since in this there is neither ease nor suffering, and the act of knowing abides here,
being its own object,Therefore utter lucidity through indifference and awareness is specified
in the protocol for the fourth stage of meditation.

17.56 Consequently, relying on the fourth stage of meditation, he made up his mind to win the
worthy state,Like a king joining forces with a strong and noble ally and then aspiring to
conquer unconquered lands.

17.57 Then he cut the five upper fetters: with the sword of intuitive wisdom which is raised
aloft by cultivation of the mind,He completely severed the five aspirational fetters, which
are bound up with superiority, and tied to the first person.

17.58 Again, with the seven elephants of the limbs of awakening he crushed the seven dormant
tendencies of the mind,Like Time, when their destruction is due, crushing the seven continents
by means of the seven planets.

17.59 The action which on fire, trees, ghee and water is exerted by rainclouds, wind, a flame
and the sun,Nanda exerted that action on the faults, quenching, uprooting, burning, and
drying them up.

17.60 Thus he overcame three surges, three sharks, three swells, the unity of water, five currents,
two shores,And two crocodiles: in his eight-piece raft, he crossed the flood of suffering
which is so hard to cross.

17.61 Having attained to the seat of arhathood, he was worthy of being served. Without ambition,
without partiality, without expectation;Without fear, sorrow, pride, or passion; while
being nothing but himself, he seemed in his constancy to be different.

17.62 And so Nanda, who, through the instruction of his brother and teacher and through his
own valiant effort,Had quieted his mind and fulfilled his task, spoke to himself these words

17.63 “Praise be to him, the Sugata, the One Gone Well, through whose compassionate pursuit
of my welfare,Great agonies were turned away and greater comforts conferred.

17.64 For while being dragged, by ignoble physicality, down a path pregnant with suffering,I
was turned back by the hook of his words, like an elephant in musk by a driver’s hook.

17.65 For through the liberating knowledge of the compassionate teacher who extracted a dart
of passion that was lodged in my heart,Now such abundant ease is mine – Oh! how happy I am
in the loss of everything!

17.66 For, by putting out the burning fire of desires, using the water of constancy, as if using
water to put out a blaze,I have now come to a state of supreme refreshment, like a hot
person descending into a cool pool.

17.67 Nothing is dear to me, nor offensive to me. There is no liking in me, much less disliking.In
the absence of those two, I am enjoying the moment, like one immune to cold and heat

17.68 Like gaining safety after great danger; like gaining release after long imprisonment;Like
having no boat and yet gaining the far shore, after a mighty deluge; and like gaining
clarity, after fearful darkness;

17.69 Like gaining health out of incurable illness, relief from immeasurable debt,Or escape
from an enemy presence; or like gaining, after a famine, plentiful food:

17.70 Thus have I come to utmost quiet, through the [quieting] influence of the teacher.Again
and repeatedly I do homage to him: Homage, homage to the Worthy One, the Realised One!

17.71 By him I was taken to the golden-peaked mountain, and to heaven, where, with the example
of the she-monkey,And by means of the women who wander the triple heaven, I who was a slave
to love, sunk in girl-filled strife, was lifted up and out.

17.72 From that extreme predicament, from that worthless mire, up he dragged me, like a feeble-footed
elephant from the mud,To be released into this quieted, dustless, feverless, sorrowless,
ultimate true reality, which is free from darkness.

17.73 I salute the great supremely compassionate Seer, bowing my head to him, the knower of
types, the knower of hearts,The fully awakened one, the holder of the ten powers, the best
of healers, the deliverer: again, I bow to him.

The 17th Canto of the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “Obtaining the Deathless Nectar.”

