3.1 For ascetic practice, then, he left Kapilavāstu – a teeming mass of horses, elephants and
chariots,Majestic, safe, and loved by its citizens. Leaving the city, he started resolutely
for the forest.

3.2 In the approach to ascetic practice of the various traditions, and in the attachment of
sages to various restraints,He observed the miseries of thirsting for an object. Seeing asceticism
to be unreliable, he turned away from it.

3.3 Then Ārāda, who spoke of freedom, and likewise Uḍraka, who inclined towards quietness,He
served, his heart set on truth, and he left. He who intuited the path intuited: “This also
is not it.”

3.4 Of the different traditions in the world, he asked himself, Which one was the best?Not obtaining
certainty elsewhere, he entered after all into ascetic practice that was most severe.

3.5 Then, having ascertained that this was not the path, he abandoned that extreme asceticism
too.Understanding the realm of meditation to be supreme, he ate good food in readiness to
realise the deathless.

3.6 With golden arms fully expanded and as if in a yoke, with lengthened eyes, and bull-like
gait,He came to a fig tree, growing up from the earth, with the will to awakening that belongs
to the supreme method of investigation.

3.7 Sitting there, mind made up, as unmovingly stable as the king of mountains,He overcame the
grim army of Māra and awoke to the step which is happy, irremovable, and irreducible.

3.8 Sensing the completion of his task, the denizens of heaven whose heart’s desire is the deathless
nectarBuzzed with unbridled joy. But Māra’s crew was downcast and trembled.

3.9 The earth with its mountains shook, that which feeds the fire blew benignly,The drums of
the gods sounded, and from the cloudless sky rain fell.

3.10 Awake to the one great ageless purpose, and universal in his compassion,He proceeded, in
order to display the eternal deathless nectar, to the city sustained by the waters of the
Varaṇā and the Asī – to Vārāṇasī.

3.11 And so the wheel of dharma – whose hub is uprightness, whose rim is constancy, determination,
and balanced stillness,And whose spokes are the rules of discipline – there the Seer
turned, in that assembly, for the welfare of the world.

3.12 “This is suffering; this is the tangled mass of causes producing it;This is cessation;
and here is a means.” Thus, one by one, this supreme set of four,

3.13 The seer set out, with its the three divisions of the unequalled, the incontrovertible,
the ultimate,And with its statement of twelvefold linkage; after which he instructed, as
the first follower, him of the Kauṇḍinya clan.

3.14 For the fathomless sea of faults, whose water is falsity, where fish are cares,And which
is disturbed by waves of anger, lust, and fear; he had crossed, and he took the world across
too.

3.15 Having instructed many people at Kāśi and at Gaya As also at Giri-vraja,He made his way
then to the city of his fathers, in his deeply compassionate desire to include it.

3.16 To people possessed by ends, serving many and various paths,Splendour had arisen that seemed
like the sun: Gautama was like the sun, dispelling darkness.

3.17 Seeing then all sides of Kapilavāstu – which was famed for its most beautiful properties,And
was pure and clean in substance and design, and pleasantly wooded – he looked without
longing, as though at a forest.

3.18 For he had become free of belonging: he was sure in his thinking, the master of himself.How
much less did he belong to those causes of manifold worry – family, countrymen, friends
and property?

3.19 Being revered gave him no thrill, and neither did disrespect cause him any grief.His direction
was decided, come sword or sandalwood, and whether the going was tough or easy he
was not diminished.

3.20 And so the king learned that his son had arrived as the Tathāgata, the One Arrived Thus;With
but a few horses straggling behind him, out the king charged, in his eagerness to see
his son.

3.21 The Sugata, the One Gone Well, saw the king coming thus, composure lost in expectation,And
saw the rest of the people too, with tearful faces; wishing to direct them, up he took
himself, into the sky.

3.22 He strode over heaven as if over the earth; and sat again, in the stillness of having stopped.Without
changing his direction, he lay down; he showed many changing forms while remaining,
in this manner, all of one piece.

3.23 He walked over water as if on dry land, immersed himself in the soil as though it were
water,Rained as a cloud in the sky, and shone like the newly-risen sun.

3.24 Simultaneously glowing like a fire and passing water like a cloud,He gave off a light resembling
molten gold, like a cloud set aglow by daybreak or by dusk.

3.25 Looking up at him in the network of gold and pearls that seemed to wrap around him like
an upraised flag,The king became joyful beyond measure and the assembled people, bowing down,
felt deep appreciation.

3.26 So, perceiving that he had made a vessel of the ruler of men, through the wealth of his
accomplishments,And that the townsfolk also were favourably disposed, the Guide gave voice
to the dharma and the discipline.

3.27 Then the royal hero reaped the first fruit For the fulfillment of the deathless dharma.Having
obtained unthinkable dharma from the sage, he bowed accordingly in the sage’s direction,
as to a guru.

3.28 Many then who were clear in mind – alert to the agony of birth and death –Among mighty
Śākya-born men of action, went forth into the wandering life, like bulls that had been startled
by fire.

3.29 But even those who did not leave home, out of regard for children or father or mother:They
also, until their death, embraced the preventive rule and, with ready minds, they held
to it:

3.30 No living creature, no matter how small, was subjected to violence, even by a person who
killed for a living,Still less by a man of great virtue, good family and unfailing gentleness
– and how much less by a servant of the Sage?

3.31 The man not shy of hard work and yet still short of money, though he could not bear the
other’s slights,Did not, even so, carry off the other’s goods; for he shrank from others’
riches as from a snake.

3.32 Even the man of money and youth with senses excited by objects of his affection –Even he
never approached others’ wives, for he deemed them to be more dangerous than a burning fire.

3.33 Nobody told an untruth, nor made true but nasty gossip,Nor crooned slick but malicious
words, nor spoke kindly words that had a backbiting motive

3.34 No greedy-minded person, in his heart, had any designs on the treasures of others;Seeing
sensual happiness to be no happiness, the wise went freely on their way, as if satisfied
in that area already.

3.35 Nobody showed any hostility towards the other; rather, they looked on others with positive
warmth,As mother, father, child or friend: for each person there saw in the other himself.

3.36 That the fruit of conduct, inevitably, will be realized in the future, is being realized
now, and has been realized in the past;And that thus is determined how one fares in the
world: this is an insight that, again, each experienced unerringly.

3.37 By this most skillful and powerful tenfold means, by the means of their conduct,Although
virtue was lax in a declining age, the people there, with the Sage’s help, fared well

3.38 But nobody there, because of his virtues, expected happiness in a resulting birth;Having
learned that all becoming is pernicious, people worked to eradicate becoming, not to become
something.

3.39 Even householders were free from endless doubting, their views washed spotlessly away:For
many had entered the stream, and others had reduced the passions to a trickle.

3.40 Even one there who had been given over to ends like wealthWas now content with free giving,
discipline, and restraint: he also fared well, not straying from the true path.

3.41 Neither from within the self, nor from without, did any terror arise; nor from fate.By
dint of their true happiness and material plenty and practical merits, the citizens there
rejoiced as in the golden age of Manu.

3.42 Thus exulting in freedom from disease and calamity, that city was the equal of Kuru, Raghu
and Pūru,With the great dispassionate Seer serving there, for the good of all, as a guide
to peace.

The 3rd Canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “A Portrait of the Tathāgata.”

