7.1 Bearing the insignia, then, whose form was fixed by his teacher – bearing it with his body
but not with his mind –And being constantly carried off by thoughts of his wife, he whose
name was joy was not joyful.

7.2 Amid the wealth of flowers of the month of flowers, assailed on every side by the flower-bannered
god of love,And with feelings that are familiar to the young, he stayed in a vihāra
but found no peace.

7.3 Standing, distraught, by a row of mango trees amid the numbing hum of hovering insects,He
with his lengthy arms and yoke-like shoulders, thought of his beloved and forcibly stretched
himself open, as if drawing a bow.

7.4 Receiving from the mango trees a rain of tiny flowers like saffron powder,He thought of
his wife and heaved long sighs, like a newly-captured elephant in a cage.

7.5 He had been, for those who came to him seeking refuge, an abater of sorrow, and, for the
conceited, a creator of sorrow,Now he leant against ‘the tree of freedom from sorrow,’ the
a-śoka tree, and he became a sorrower: he sorrowed for a lover of a-śoka groves, his beloved
wife.

7.6 A slender priyaṅgu creeper, beloved of his beloved, he noticed shying away, as if afraid,And
tearfully he remembered her, his lover with her tearful face, as pale as a priyaṅgu flower.

7.7 Seeing a cuckoo resting on the flower-covered crest of a tilaka tree,He imagined his lover
leaning against the watchtower, her curls and tresses resting on her white upper garment.

7.8 A vine with ‘flowers whiter than pearls,’ the ati-muktaka, having attached itself to the
side of a mango tree, was thriving:Nanda eyed the blossoming creeper and fretted “When will
Sundarī cling to me like that?”

7.9 The budding teeth of yawning nāga trees erupted there like ivory caskets filled with gold,But
they drew his anguished eye no better than desert scrub.

7.10 The gandha-parṇa trees emitted their fragrance like a gandharva’s girlfriend, brimming
with perfume,But for him whose mind was elsewhere, and who was sorrowful to the core, they
did not win the nose: they pained the heart.

7.11 Resounding with the throaty cries of impassioned peacocks, with the satisfied celebrating
of cuckoos,And with the relentless supping of nectar by bees, the forest encroached upon
his mind.

7.12 As there he burned with a fire arisen from the fire board of his wife, a fire with fancies
for smoke and darkest hell for flames,As he burned in his innermost heart with a fire
of desire, fortitude failed him and he uttered various laments:

7.13 “Now I understand what a very difficult thing those men have done, will do, and are doingWho
have walked, will walk, and are walking the way of painful asceticism, leaving behind
their tearful-faced lovers.

7.14 There is no bond in the world, whether of wood or rope or iron,As strong as this bond:
an amorous voice and a face with darting eyes.

7.15 For having been cut or broken – by one’s own initiative or by the strength of friends –
those bonds cease to exist;Whereas the fetter made of love, except through wisdom and toughness,
cannot be undone.

7.16 That wisdom is not in me which might make for peace, and since I am of a kindly nature,
toughness also is lacking.I am sensual by nature and yet the Buddha is my guru: I am stuck
as if inside a moving wheel.

7.17 For though I have adopted the beggar’s insignia, and am taught by one who is twice my guru,
as elder brother and enlightened sage,In every circumstance I find no peace – like a
greylag gander separated from its mate.

7.18 Even now it continues to run through my mind how after I clouded the mirrorShe pretended
to be angry and said to me, as she wickedly laughed, ‘What are you doing!’

7.19 Again, the words she spoke to me, while her girlish eyes were swimming with tears, ‘Before
this paint on my face is dry, come back’: those words, even now, block my mind.

7.20 This beggar meditating at ease, who has crossed his legs in the traditional manner, and
is of the waterfall, arising out of the foot [of the hill]:Surely he is not as attached as
I am to anybody, since he sits so calmly, with an aura of contentment.

7.21 Deaf to the cuckoos’ chorus, his eyebulls never grazing upon the riches of spring,This
fellow concentrates so intently upon the teaching, that I suspect no lover is tugging at his
heart.

7.22 Credit to him who is firm in his resolve, who has retreated from curiosity and pride,Who
is at peace in himself, whose mind is turned inward, who does not strive for anything, as
he walks up and down…

7.23 ... And beholds the lotus-covered water and the flowering forest where cuckoos come calling!What
man in the prime of youth could keep such constancy in those months of spring which
are, as it were, the rival of dharma?

7.24 With their way of being, their pride, their way of moving, their grace; with a smile or
show of indignation, with their exuberance, with their voices,Women have captivated hosts
of gods and kings and seers: how then could they fail to bewilder a bloke like me?

7.25 Overcome by desire, the fire god Hiraṇya-retas, ‘Golden Sperm,’ succumbed to sex with his
wife ‘Oblation,’ Svāhā, as did ‘The Bountiful’ Indra with nymph Ahalyā;How much easier
to be overwhelmed by a woman am I, a man, who lacks the strength and resolve of the gods.

7.26 Our tradition has it that the sun god Sūrya, roused to passion for the dawn goddess Saraṇyū,
let himself be diminished for the sake of pleasure with her;He became a stallion so
as to cover her as a mare, whereby she conceived the two charioteers.

7.27 When the mind of Vaivasvata, son of the Sun, and the mind of the fire god Agni turned to
enmity, when their grip on themselves was shaken,There was war between them for many years,
because of a woman. What lesser being, here on earth, would not be caused to stray by
a woman?

7.28 And through desire the sage Vasiṣṭha, who even among the upstanding was eminent, had his
way with an outcaste, Akṣa-mālā, ‘String of Beads,’To whom was born his son Kapiñjalāda,
an eater of earth and water to rival the Sun.

7.29 So too did the seer Parāśara, user of curses as arrows, have intercourse with Kālī, who
was born from the womb of a fish;The son he conceived in her was the illustrious Dvaipāyana,
classifier of the Vedas.

7.30 Dvaipāyana, equally, while having dharma as his primary object, enjoyed a woman at a brothel
in Kāśi;Struck by her foot, with its trembling ankle bracelet, he was like a cloud being
struck by a twist of lightning.

7.31 So too did brahma-begotten Aṅgiras, when his mind was seized by passion, have sex with
Sarasvatī;To her was born his son Sārasvata, who gave voice again to missing Vedas.

7.32 Likewise Kāśyapa, at a sacrifice under the aegis of the royal seer Dilipa, while fixated
on a celestial nymph,Took the ceremonial ladle and cast into the fire his own streaming
semen, whence was conceived Asita.

7.33 Aṅgada, equally, though he had gone to the ends of ascetic practice, went overwhelmed by
desire to YamunāAnd in her he begat the super-bright Rathītara, ‘The Super Charioteer,’
and friend of the spotted deer.

7.34 Again, on catching sight of the princess Śāntā, ‘Tranquillity,’ though he had been living
in tranquillity in the forest,The sage Ṛṣya-śṛṅga, ‘Antelope Horn,’ was moved from steadfastness,
like a high-horned mountain in an earthquake.

7.35 And the son of Gādhin who, in order to become ‘the Brahman Seer,’ renounced his kingdom
and retired to the forest, having become indifferent to sensual objects:He was captivated
by the nymph Ghṛtācī, reckoning a decade with her as a single day.

7.36 So too, when hit by an arrow fired by Love, did Sthūla-śiras, ‘Thick Head,’ lose his senses
over Rambhā.He with his libidinous and wrathful nature was reckless: when she refused
him he cursed her.

7.37 And Ruru, after his beloved Pramadvarā had been robbed of her senses by a snake,Exterminated
snakes wherever he saw them: he failed, in his fury, to maintain his reserve or his
ascetic practice.

7.38 As grandson of the hare-marked moon, as son of ‘The Learned’ Budha and the goddess Iḍā,
and as one marked by personal honour and virtue, [Purū-ravas] had the special powers of the
lunar and the very learned;But thinking of the apsaras Urvaśī, this royal seer also went
mad.

7.39 And when ‘Long Shanks’ Tāla-jaṅgha, on top of a mountain, was reddened, in his libidinous
state, with passion for the apsaras Menakā,From the foot of ‘All-Beneficent’ Viśvā-vasu
he got an angry kick, like a thunderbolt striking a hin-tāla palm.

7.40 When his favourite female drowned in the waters of the Ganges, King Jahnu, his mind possessed
by disembodied Love,Blocked the flow of the Ganges with his arms, as if he were Mount
Maināka, the paragon of non-movement.

7.41 And King ‘Good Body’ Śan-tanu, when separated from goddess Gaṅgā, shook like a śāla tree
whose roots the Ganges was washing away:The son of Pratipa and light of his family, he of
the body beautiful, became uncontrollable.

7.42 Again, when the avatar Saunandakin took away his Urvaśī, “She of the Wide Expanse,” the
wife whom, like the wide earth, Soma-varman had made his own,‘Moon-Armoured’ Soma-varman
whose armour, so they say, had been virtuous conduct, roamed about grieving, his armour pierced
by mind-existent Love.

7.43 A king who followed his departed wife in death was ‘The Dreaded’ Bhīmika – he who was dread
power on earth;He who was famed, because of his military might, as Senāka, ‘The Missile
of War’; he who was, with his war machine, like a God of War.

7.44 Again, when Kālī’s husband Śan-tanu had gone to heaven, Jana-mejaya, ‘Causer of Trembling
among Men,’ in his desire to marry Kālī,Came up against Bhīṣma ‘The Terrible,’ and accepted
death from him, rather than relinquish his love for her.

7.45 And Pāṇḍu ‘The Pale One’ having been cursed by Passion to die on coupling with a woman,Went
nonetheless with Mādrī: he heeded not the death that would result from the great seer’s
curse, when he tasted what he was forbidden to taste.

7.46 Hordes of gods and kings and seers such as these have fallen by dint of desire into the
thrall of women.Being weak in understanding and inner strength, all the more discouraged,
when I cannot see my beloved, am I.

7.47 Therefore I shall go back home again and properly make love, as I please!For the insignia
do not sit well upon a backslider from the path of dharma, whose senses are restless and
whose mind is elsewhere.

7.48 When a man has taken the bowl in his hand, has shaved his head, and, putting pride aside,
has donned the patched-together robe,And yet he is given to pleasure and lacking in firmness
and tranquillity, then like a lamp in a picture, he is there and yet he is not.

7.49 When a man has gone forth, but the red taint of desire has not gone forth from him; when
he wears the earth-hued robe but has not transcended dirt;When he carries the bowl but is
not a vessel for the virtues; though he bears the insignia, he is neither a householder
nor a beggar.

7.50 I had thought it improper for a man with noble connections, having adopted the insignia,
to discard them again:But even [such a scruple] fades away, when I think about those royal
heroes who abandoned an ascetic grove and went home.

7.51 For the Śālva king, along with his son; and likewise Ambarīṣa and Rāma and Andha, and Rantideva,
son of SaṁkṛtiCast off their rags and clothed themselves again in finest fabrics;
they cut their twisted dreadlocks off and put their crowns back on.

7.52 Therefore as soon my guru has gone from here to beg for alms, I will give up the ochre
robe and go from here to my home;Because, for a man who bears the honoured insignia with unsound
judgement, stammering mind and weakened resolve, no ulterior purpose might exist, nor
even the present world of living beings.”

The 7th canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “Nanda’s Lament.”

