11.1 And so, having gazed upon those women who wander in the Gladdening Gardens of Nandana,Nanda
tethered the fickle and unruly mind to a tethering post of restraint.

11.2 Failing to relish the taste of freedom from care, sapless as a wilting lotus,He went through
the motions of dharma-practice, having installed the apsarases already in his heart.

11.3 Thus did one whose sense-power had been restless, whose senses had grazed on the pasture
of his wife,Come, by the very power of sense-objects, to have his sense-power reined in.

11.4 Adept in the practices of love, confused about the practices of a beggar,Set firm by the
best of practice guides, Nanda did the devout practice of abstinence.

11.5 Stifling restraint and ardent love,Like water and fire in tandem, smothered him and burned
him dry.

11.6 Though naturally good-looking, he became extremely ugly,Both from agonizing about the apsarases
and from protracted restraint.

11.7 Even when mention was made of his wife, he who had been so devoted to his wifeStood by,
seemingly bereft of passion; he neither bristled nor quavered.

11.8 Knowing him to be adamant, turned away from passion for his wife,Ānanda, having come that
way, said to Nanda with affection:

11.9 “Ah! This is a beginning that befits an educated and well-born man –Since you are holding
back the power of your senses and, abiding in yourself, you are set on restraint!

11.10 In one entangled in desires, in a man of passion, a sensualist,That such consciousness
has arisen – this is by no small cause!

11.11 A mild illness is warded off with little effort;A serious illness is cured with serious
efforts, or else it is not.

11.12 An illness of the mind is hard to remove, and yours was a powerful one.If you are rid
of it, you are in every way steadfast.

11.13 For an ignoble man good is hard to do; for an arrogant man it is hard to be meek;For a
greedy man giving is hard, and hard for a man of passion is the practice of devout abstinence.

11.14 But I have one doubt concerning this steadfastness of yours in restraint.I would like
assurance on this matter, if you think fit to tell me.

11.15 Straight talk should not be taken amiss:However harsh it is, so long as its intention
is pure, a good man will not retain it as harsh.

11.16 For there is disagreeable good advice, which is kind; and there is agreeable bad advice,
which is not kind;But advice that is both agreeable and good is as hard to come by as medicine
that is both sweet and salutary.

11.17 Trust, acting in the other’s interest, sharing of joy and sorrow,And tolerance, as well
as affection: such, between good men, is the conduct of a friend.

11.18 So now I am going to speak to you out of affection, with no wish to hurt.For my intention
is to speak of that better way for you in regard to which I ought not to be indifferent.

11.19 You are practising dharma, so they say, for celestial nymphs as wages.Is that so? Is it
true? such a thing would be a joke!

11.20 If this really is true, I will tell you a medicine for it;Or if it is the impertinence
of chatterers, then that dust I shall expose.”

11.21 Then – though it was tenderly done – [Nanda] was stricken in his heart.After reflecting,
he drew in a long breath, and his face inclined slightly downward.

11.22 And so, knowing the signs that betrayed the set of Nanda’s mind,Ānanda spoke words which
were disagreeable but sweet in consequence:

11.23 “I know from the look on your face what your motive is in practising dharma.And knowing
that, there arises in me towards you laughter and at the same time pity.

11.24 Like somebody who, with a view to sitting on it, carried around on his shoulder a heavy
rock;That is how you, with a view to sensuality, are labouring to bear restraint.

11.25 Just as, in its desire to charge, a wild ram draws back,So, for the sake of non-abstinence,
is this devout abstinence of yours!

11.26 Just as merchants buy merchandise moved by a desire to make profit,That is how you are
practising dharma, as if it were a tradable commodity, not for the sake of peace.

11.27 Just as, with a particular crop in view, a ploughman scatters seed,That is how, because
of being desperate for an object, you have renounced objects.

11.28 Just as a man who craves some pleasurable remedy might want to be ill,That is how in your
thirst for an object you are seeking out suffering.

11.29 Just as a man sees honey and fails to notice a precipice,That is how you are seeing the
heavenly nymphs and not seeing the fall that will come in the end.

11.30 Blazing with a fire of desire in your heart, you carry out observances with your body:What
is this devout abstinence of yours, who does not practise abstinence with his mind?

11.31 Again, since in spiralling through saṁsāra you have gained celestial nymphs and left themA
hundred times over, what is this yearning of yours for those women?

11.32 A fire is not satisfied by dry brushwood, nor the salty ocean by water,Nor a man of thirst
by his desires. Desires, therefore, do not make for satisfaction.

11.33 Without satisfaction, whence peace? Without peace, whence ease?Without ease, whence joy?
Without joy, whence enjoyment?

11.34 Therefore if you want enjoyment, let your mind be directed within.Tranquil and impeccable
is enjoyment of the inner self and there is no enjoyment to equal it.

11.35 In it, you have no need of musical instruments, or women, or ornaments;On your own, wherever
you are, you can indulge in that enjoyment.

11.36 The mind suffers mightily as long as thirst persists.Eradicate that thirst; for suffering
co-exists with thirst, or else does not exist.

11.37 In prosperity or in adversity, by day or by night,For the man who thirsts after desires,
peace is not possible.

11.38 The pursuit of desires is full of suffering, and attainment of them is not where satisfaction
lies;The separation from them is inevitably sorrowful; but the celestial constant
is separation.

11.39 Even having done action that is hard to do, and reached a heaven that is hard to reach,[A
man] comes right back to the world of men, as if to his own house after a spell away.

11.40 The backslider when his residual good has run outFinds himself among the animals or in
the world of the departed, or else he goes to hell.

11.41 Having enjoyed in heaven the utmost sensual objects,He falls back, beset by suffering:
what has that enjoyment done for him?

11.42 Through tender love for living creatures Śibi gave his own flesh to a hawk.He fell back
from heaven, even after doing such a difficult deed.

11.43 Having attained half of Indra’s throne as a veritable earth-lord of the old school,Māndhātṛ
when his time with the gods elapsed came back down again.

11.44 Though he ruled the gods, Nahuṣa fell to earth;He turned into a snake, so they say, and
even today has not wriggled free.

11.45 Likewise King Ilivila being perfect in kingly conduct,Went to heaven and fell back down,
becoming, so they say, a turtle in the ocean.

11.46 Bhūri-dyumna and Yayāti and other excellent kings,Having bought heaven by their actions,
gave it up again, after that karma ran out –

11.47 Whereas the asuras, who had been gods in heaven when the suras robbed them of their rank,Went
bemoaning their lost glory down to their Pātāla lair.

11.48 But why such citing of royal seers, or of asuras, suras, and the like?Mighty Indras have
fallen in their hundreds! Even the most exalted position is not secure.

11.49 Again, Indra’s luminous sidekick, he of the three strides, lit up Indra’s court,And yet
when his karma waned he fell to earth from the apsarases’ midst, screaming.

11.50 ‘Oh, the grove of Citra-ratha! Oh, the pond! Oh, the heavenly Ganges! Oh, my beloved!’
–Thus lament the distressed denizens of heaven as they fall to earth.

11.51 For intense already is the pain that arises in those facing death in this worldAnd how
much worse is it for the pleasure-addicts when they finally fall from heaven?

11.52 Their clothes gather dust; their glorious garlands wither;Sweat appears on their limbs;
and in their sitting there is no enjoyment.

11.53 These are the first signs of the imminent fall from heaven of sky-dwellers,Like the unwelcome
but sure signs of the approaching death of those subject to dying.

11.54 When the pleasure that arises from enjoyment of desires in heavenIs compared with the
pain of falling, the pain, assuredly, is greater.

11.55 Knowing heaven, therefore, to be ill-fated, precarious, unreliable, unsatisfactory, and
transitory, set your heart upon immunity from that circuit.

11.56 For though he attained a peak experience of bodiless being, Sage Uḍraka,At the expiration
of his karma, will fall from that state into the womb of an animal.

11.57 Through seven years of loving kindness, Sunetra went from here to Brahma’s world,But he
span around again and came back to live in a womb.

11.58 Since heaven-dwellers, even when all-powerful, are subject to decay,What wise man would
aspire to a decadent sojourn in heaven?

11.59 For just as a bird tied to a string, though it has flown far, comes back again;So too
do people return who are tied to the string of ignorance, however far they have travelled.

11.60 A man temporarily released from prison on bailEnjoys home comforts and then, when his
time is up, he must go back to prison;In the same way, through restrictive practices beginning
with meditation, a man gets to heaven, as if on bail,And after enjoying those objects
which were his karmic reward, he eventually is dragged back down to earth.

11.61 Fish in a pond who have swum into a net, unwarily,Do not know the misfortune that results
from capture, but contentedly move around in the water;In the same way, meditators in
heaven (who are really of this world of men), think that they have achieved their end;And
so they assume their own position to be favourable, secure and settled – as they continue
to whirl around.

11.62 Therefore, see this world to be shot through with the calamities of birth, sickness, and
death;See it – whether in heaven, among men, in hell, or among animals or the departed
– to be reeling through saṁsāra.Seeing the world to be thus, for the sake of that fearless
refuge, for that sorrowless nectar of immortality, which is benign, and beyond death and
decay,Devoutly practise abstinence, and abandon your fancy for a precarious heaven.”

The 11th canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “Negation of Heaven.”

