13.1 And so, Nanda was affirmed by the great seer, in the matter of confidence;He felt filled
with the deepest joy, as if drenched in the deathless nectar.

13.2 To the Fully Awakened Buddha, by virtue of that confidence, he seemed already to be a success;And
to himself, having been initiated by the Buddha, he felt as though he had arrived
already on the better path.

13.3 Some in soothing tones; some with tough talk,Some by both these means, he the trainer trained.

13.4 Just as gold born from dirt is pure, spotless, gleaming,And while lying in the dirt is
not tarnished by the dirt’s impurities,

13.5 And just as a lotus-leaf is born in water and remains in water,But neither above nor below
is sullied by the water,

13.6 So the Sage, born in the world, and acting for the benefit of the world,Because of his
state of action, and spotlessness, is not tainted by worldly things.

13.7 Joining with others and leaving them; love and toughness; and talking, as well as meditation
itself:He used these means during his instruction for the purpose of healing, not to
make a following for himself.

13.8 Thus did the benevolent one, out of his great compassion, take on a formBy which he might
release fellow living beings from suffering.

13.9 Seeing, then, that by boosting Nanda he had made a receptacle,The best of speakers, the
knower of processes, spoke of better ways as a process:

13.10 “Starting afresh from here, my friend, with the power of confidence leading you forward,In
order to get to the nectar of deathlessness you should watch the manner of your action.

13.11 So that the use of body and voice becomes simple for you,Make it expansive and open, and
guarded, and free from disconnectedness –

13.12 Expansive by reality’s doing; open from not hiding;Guarded because aimed at prevention;
and unbroken through absence of fault.

13.13 With regard for purity of body and voice, and with regard also for the sevenfold [prohibition
on bodily and vocal] conduct,You should work to perfect a proper way of making a living,
on the grounds of integrity –

13.14 On the grounds of not indulging the five faults, beginning with hypocrisy;On the grounds
of fleeing the four predators of practice, such as astrology;

13.15 On the grounds of not accepting things to be avoided, such as valuables linked to the
needless killing of living creatures;On the grounds of accepting the established rules for
begging, with their definite limits;

13.16 As a person who is contented, pristine, and pleasant, you can, through making a living
cleanly and well,Counteract suffering all the way to liberation.

13.17 Separately from overt action, and from the origin of the use of body and voice,I have
spoken of making a living because it is so hard to make a pure one –

13.18 For hard to be washed away is the view of a househoulder with his many and various concerns,And
also [hard to be kept pure] is the livelihood of a beggar whose subsistence depends
on others.

13.19 Such is termed “the discipline of integrity.” In sum, it is conduct;Without it there could
truly be no going forth, nor state of being at home.

13.20 Steeped in good conduct, therefore, lead this life of devout abstinence,And in what is
even minutely blameworthy see danger, being firm in your purpose.

13.21 For founded on integrity unfurl all actions on the better path,Just as events like standing
unfold, when [a force] resists the earth.

13.22 Let it be grasped, my friend, that release is seated in dispassion,Dispassion in conscious
awareness, and conscious awareness in knowing and seeing.

13.23 And let it be experienced, again, that the knowing is seated in a stillnessAnd that the
seat of the stillness is a body-mind at ease.

13.24 An assurance on which sits ease of the body-mind is of the highest order,And the assurance
is seated in enjoyment. Again, let this be realised in experience.

13.25 The enjoyment is seated in a great happiness which, similarly, is understood to be of
the highest order;And the happiness is seated in a freedom from furrowing the heart over things
done badly or not done.

13.26 But the freedom of the mind from remorse is seated in pristine practice of integrity.Therefore,
[realising] that integrity comes first, purify the discipline of integrity.

13.27 The discipline of integrity is so called because it comes out of repeated practice; repeated
practice comes out of devotion to training;Devotion to training comes out of direction
in it; and direction comes out of submitting to that direction.

13.28 For the discipline of integrity, my friend, is the refuge: it is like a guide in the wilderness,It
is friend, kinsman, and protector; it is wealth, and it is strength.

13.29 Since the discipline of integrity is such, my friend, you should work to perfect the discipline
of integrity.Among those who practise, moreover, this is the stance taken in different
endeavours whose aim is freedom.

13.30 On this basis, standing grounded in awareness, you should hold back the naturally impetuous
senses from the objects of those senses.

13.31 There is less to fear from an enemy or from fire, or from a snake, or from lightning,Than
there is from one’s own senses; for through them one is forever being smitten.

13.32 Some people some of the time are beleaguered by hateful enemies – or else they are not.Besieged
through the senses are all people everywhere, all of the time.

13.33 Nor does one go to hell when smitten by the likes of an enemy;But meekly is one pulled
there when smitten through the impetuous senses.

13.34 The pain of being smitten by those others may occur in the heart – or else it may not.The
pain of being oppressed through one’s senses is a matter of the heart and indeed of the
body.

13.35 For smeared with the poison of conceptions, are those arrows, produced from five senses,Whose
tails are anxiety, whose tips are thrills, and whose range is the vast emptiness of
objects.

13.36 Fired off by Desire, the hunter, they strike human fawns in the heart;Unless they are
warded away, men wounded by them duly fall.

13.37 Standing firm in the arena of restraint, and bearing the bow of resolve,The mighty man,
as they rain down, must fend them away, wearing the armour of awareness.

13.38 From ebbing of the power of the senses, as if from subjugation of enemies,One sleeps or
sits at ease, in joyful recreation, wherever one may be.

13.39 For in the constant hankering of those senses after objects in the world,There occurs
out of that ignominy no more consciousness than there is in the hoping of hounds.

13.40 A cluster of sense organs is no more sated by objects,Than is the ocean, even when constantly
filled, by water.

13.41 It is necessarily through the senses, each in its own sphere, that one must function in
this world.But not to be seized upon in that realm is an objectified image or any secondary
sexual sign:

13.42 On seeing a form with your eye [you] are contained in the sum of the elements:The conception
that ‘it is a woman’ or ‘it is a man’ you should not frame.

13.43 If a notion of woman or man does intrude at any time in relation to anyone,Upon hair,
teeth, and the rest, for their beauty, you should not dwell.

13.44 Nothing, then, is to be taken away and nothing is to be added:The reality is to be investigated
as it really is, whatever and however it is.

13.45 In your observing what is, like this, always in the territory of the senses,There will
be no foothold for longing and dejection.

13.46 Longing, using cherished forms, smites the sensual masses:A foe who has a friendly face,
she’s fair of speech and foul of heart.

13.47 Conversely, what is called dejectedness is, in connection with an object, a contrary reactionBy
going along with which, in one’s ignorance, one is smitten hereafter, and smitten
here and now.

13.48 When, by getting and not getting his way, [a man] is pained as if by cold or heat,He finds
no refuge; nor arrives on a better path: hence the unsteady sense-power of the masses.

13.49 And yet the power of the senses, though operative, need not become glued to an object,So
long as in the mind, with regard to that object, illusion is not operating.

13.50 Just as a fire burns only where fuel and air co-exist,So a fire of affliction arises,
from an object and from illusion.

13.51 For through an unreal illusion one is bound to an object;Seeing that very same object
as it really is, one is set free.

13.52 On seeing one and the same form this man is enamoured, that man is disgusted;Somebody
else remains in the middle; while yet another feels thereto a human warmth.

13.53 Thus, an object is not the cause of bondage or of liberation;It is due to particular illusions
that attachment arises or does not.

13.54 Through effort of the highest order, therefore, contain the power of the senses;For unguarded
senses make for suffering and for becoming.

13.55 The senses are like serpents coiled in sensual enjoyment with eyes of selfish views, their
many heads are heedlessness and their flickering tongues are excitement:The snaky senses
lurk in mind-pits, their venom eager desire; and when they bite there is no cure, save
the antidote of cessation.

13.56 Therefore, towards those mischief-making foes, seeing, smelling, hearing, tasting, and
feeling,Show in every situation a vigilance born of restraint. In this matter you are not
for an instant to be heedless.

The 13th Canto of the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “Defeating the Power of the Senses through
the Discipline of Integrity.”

