15.1 In whatever place of solitude you are, cross the legs in the supreme mannerAnd align the
body so that it tends straight upward; thus attended by awareness that is directed...

15.2 Towards the tip of the nose or towards the forehead, or in between the eyebrows,Let the
inconstant mind be fully engaged with the fundamental.

15.3 If some desirous idea, a fever of the mind, should venture to offend you,Entertain no scent
of it but shake it off as if pollen had landed on your robe.

15.4 Even if, as a result of calm consideration, you have let go of desires,You must, as if
shining light into darkness, abolish them by means of opposition.

15.5 What lies behind those desires sleeps on, like a fire covered with ashes;You are to extinguish
it, my friend, by the means of mental development, as if using water to put out a
fire.

15.6 For from that source they re-emerge, like shoots from a seed.In its absence they would
be no more – like shoots in the absence of a seed.

15.7 See how acquisition and other troubles stem from the desires of men of desire,And on that
basis cut off at their root those troubles, which are akin to enemies calling themselves
friends.

15.8 Fleeting desires; desires which bring privation; flighty desires, which are the causes
of wagging to and fro;And common desires, are to be dealt with like poisonous snakes –

15.9 The chasing of which leads to trouble, the keeping of which does not conduce to peace,And
the losing of which makes for great anguish. Securing them does not bring contentment.

15.10 Satisfaction through extra-ordinary wealth; success through the gaining of paradise,And
happiness born from desires: he who sees these things comes to nothing.

15.11 Pay no heed to the changeable, unformed, insubstantial and ungrounded desires,Which are
presumed to bring happiness; being here and now, you need pay no heed to those desires.

15.12 If hatred or cruelty should stir up your mind,Let it be charmed by their opposite, as
turbid water is by a jewel.

15.13 Know their opposite to be kindness and compassion;For this opposition is forever like
brightness and darkness.

15.14 He in whom wrongdoing has been given up and yet hatred carries on,Hits himself with dust
like an elephant after a good bath.

15.15 Upon mortal beings who are pained by sickness, dying, aging, and the rest,What noble person
with human warmth would lay the utmost pain?

15.16 Again, a tainted mind here and now may or may not trouble the other;But instantly burned
up in this moment is the mind of the man of tainted consciousness himself.

15.17 On this basis, towards all beings, it is kindness and compassion,Not hatred or cruelty,
that you should opt for.

15.18 For whatever a human being continually thinks,In that direction, through habit, the mind
of this person veers.

15.19 Therefore disregarding what is not helpful focus on what is helpful,Which might be valuable
for you here and now and might be for the reaching of ultimate value.

15.20 For unhelpful thoughts carried in the heart densely grow,Producing in equal measure nothing
of value for the self and for the other.

15.21 Because they make obstacles on the better path, they lead to the falling apart of the
self;And because they undermine the worthy condition, they lead to the falling apart of the
other’s trust.

15.22 Concentration during activities of the mind, you should certainly practise too.But above
all, my friend, nothing unhelpful should you think.

15.23 That anxious thought of enjoying the three desires which churns in the mindDoes not meet
with merit, but produces bondage.

15.24 Tending to cause offence to living beings and torment for oneself,Disturbed thinking becomes
delusion and leads to hell.

15.25 With unhelpful thoughts, therefore, you should not mar your self– Which is a good sword
and bejewelled – as if you were digging the earth and getting spattered with mud.

15.26 Just as an ignoramus might burn as firewood the best aloes,So, wrong-headedly, would one
waste this state of being human.

15.27 Again, just as he might leave the jewel and carry away from the jewel-island a clod,So
would one leave the dharma that leads to happiness and think evil.

15.28 Just as he might go to the Himālayas and eat not herbs but poison,So would one arrive
at being a human being and do not good but harm.

15.29 Being awake to this, you must see off thought by antagonistic means,As if using a finely-honed
counter-wedge to drive a wedge from a cleft in a log.

15.30 And so, should there be anxiety about whether or not your family is prospering,Investigate
the nature of the world of the living in order to put a stop to it.

15.31 Among beings dragged by our own doing through the cycle of saṁsāra,Who are our own people,
and who are other people? It is through ignorance that people attach to people.

15.32 For one who turned on a bygone road into a relative, is a stranger to you;And a stranger,
on a road to come, will become your relative.

15.33 Just as birds in the evening flock together at separate locations,So is the mingling over
many generations of one’s own and other people.

15.34 Just as, under any old roof, travellers shelter togetherAnd then go again their separate
ways, so are relatives joined.

15.35 In this originally shattered world nobody is the beloved of anybody.Held together by cause
and effect, humankind is like sand in a clenched fist.

15.36 For mother cherishes son thinking “He will keep me,”And son honours mother thinking “She
bore me in her womb.”

15.37 As long as relatives act agreeably towards each other,They engender affection; but otherwise
it is enmity.

15.38 A close relation is demonstrably unfriendly; a stranger proves to be a friend.By the different
things they do, folk break and make affection.

15.39 Just as an artist, all by himself, might fall in love with a woman he painted,So, each
generating attachment by himself, do people become attached to one another.

15.40 That relation who, in another life, was so dear to you:What use to you is he? What use
to him are you?

15.41 With thoughts about close relatives, therefore, you should not enshroud the mind.There
is no abiding difference, in the flux of saṁsāra, between one’s own people and people in
general.

15.42 “That country is an easy place to live; that one is well-provisioned; that one is happy.”If
there should arise any such idea in you,

15.43 You are to give it up, my friend, and not entertain it in any way,Knowing the whole world
to be ablaze with the manifold fires of the faults.

15.44 Again, from the turning of the circle of the seasons, and from hunger, thirst and fatigue,Everywhere
suffering is the rule. Not somewhere is happiness found.

15.45 Here cold, there heat; here disease, there dangerOppress humanity in the extreme. The
world, therefore, has no place of refuge.

15.46 Aging, sickness and death are the great terror of this world.There is no place where that
terror does not arise.

15.47 Where this body goes there suffering follows.There is no way in the world going on which
one is not afflicted.

15.48 Even an area that is pleasant, abundant in provisions, and safe,Should be regarded as
a deprived area where burn the fires of affliction.

15.49 In this world beset by hardships physical and mental,There is no cosy place to which one
might go and be at ease.

15.50 While suffering, everywhere and for everyone, continues at every moment,You are not to
enthuse, my friend, over the world’s shimmering images.

15.51 When your enthusiasm is turned back from all that,The whole living world you will deem
to be, as it were, on fire.

15.52 Any idea you might have, then, that has to do with not dying,Is, with an effort of will,
to be obliterated as a disorder of your whole being.

15.53 Not a moment of trust is to be placed in life,For, like a tiger lying in wait, Time slays
the unsuspecting.

15.54 That “I am young,” or “I am strong,” should not occur to you:Death kills in all situations
without regard for sprightliness.

15.55 As he drags about that field of misfortunes which is a body,Expectations of well-being
or of continuing life do not arise in one who is observant.

15.56 Who could be complacent carrying around a body, a receptacle for the elements,Which is
like a basket full of snakes each opposed to another?

15.57 That a man draws breath and next time around breathes in again,Know to be a wonder; for
staying alive is nothing to breathe easy about.

15.58 Here is another wonder: that one who was asleep wakes upOr, having been up, goes back
to sleep; for many enemies has the owner of a body.

15.59 He who stalks humankind, from the womb onwards, with murderous intent:Who can breath easy
about him? Death, poised like an enemy with sword upraised.

15.60 No man born into the world, however endowed with learning and power,Ever defeats Death,
maker of ends, nor has ever defeated him, nor ever will defeat him.

15.61 For cajoling, bribing, dividing, or the use of force or restraint,When impetuous Death
has arrived, are powerless to beat him back.

15.62 So place no trust in teetering life,For Time is always carrying it off and does not wait
for old age.

15.63 Seeing the world to be without substance, as fragile as a water-bubble,What man of sound
mind could harbour the notion of not dying?

15.64 So for the giving up, in short, of all these ideas,Mindfulness of inward and outward breathing,
my friend, you should make into your own possession.

15.65 Using this device you should take in good timeCounter-measures against ideas, like remedies
against illnesses.

15.66 A dirt-washer in pursuit of gold washes away first the coarse grains of dirt,Then the
finer granules, so that the [material] is cleansed; and by the cleansing he retains the rudiments
of gold.

15.67 In the same way, a man whose mind is poised, in pursuit of liberation, lets go first of
the gross faults,Then of the subtler ones, so that his [mind] is cleansed, and by the cleansing
he retains the rudiments of dharma.

15.68 Just as gold, washed with water, is separated from dirt in this world, methodically,And
just as the smith heats the gold in the fire and repeatedly turns it over,Just so is the
practitioner’s mind, with delicacy and accuracy, separated from faults in this world,And
just so, after cleansing it from afflictions, does the practitioner temper the mind and collect
it.

15.69 Again, just as the smith brings gold to a state where he can work it easilyIn as many
ways as he likes into all kinds of ornaments,So too a beggar of cleansed mind tempers his
mind,And directs his yielding mind among the powers of knowing, as he wishes and wherever
he wishes.

The 15th canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “Abandoning Ideas.”

