1.1 A sage named Kapila Gautama, an outstanding upholder of dharma,Became as consumed in ascetic
practice as was Kākṣīvat Gautama.

1.2 Ceaselessly he shone his light, like Kāśyapa the sun, on blazing asceticism;And in promoting
that asceticism he pushed himself, like Kāśyapa the sage, to extreme achievement.

1.3 For the offerings he served himself, he milked a cow, like Vasiṣṭha;In schooling his disciples
in asceticism, he milked a cow, like Vasiṣṭha.

1.4 In high-mindedness, he was like a second Dīrgha-tapas;And he was like a third in the mould
of Kāvya and Āṅgiras, in religious thought.

1.5 On a bright slope of the Himālayas this man steeped in ascetic practiceHad his ashram, the
domain and the very seat of ascetic practices.

1.6 Wooded with charming shrubs and trees and abounding with lush, soft grass,It was so thick
with sacrificial smoke that it constantly resembled a raincloud.

1.7 With soft, sandy, and smooth soil, made yellowish white by a covering of kesara blossoms,And
divided into areas, with no commingling, it was like a body painted with cosmetic pigments.

1.8 Pure, esteemed for their sacred presence, edifying, and cultivatingLike friends, were the
lakes it stood among – fluent, and bearing lotuses.

1.9 With abundant flowers and fruits beautifying the forests all around it,It shone and it flourished,
like a man furnished with a means.

1.10 Content to feed on wild rice and fruit, the ascetics were self-abiding, inhibited, and
retiring,Though the ashram was full of them, it seemed to be utterly empty.

1.11 The sound of the fires receiving offerings, of the peacocks with their crested heads uttering
their repetitive cry,And of the sacred bathing places, during ablutions, was all that
one heard there.

1.12 The stags there, their manes beautifully braided, on undefiled elevations fit to be sacrificial
altars,Seemed as though, complete with puffy rice and mādhavi flowers, they had been
prepared as religious offerings.

1.13 Even lesser creatures moved there in the same subdued manner as the stags,As if from their
ascetic protectors they had learned the rules of discipline.

1.14 Even in the face of precarious immunity to rebirth, and notwithstanding inconsistencies
in their time-honoured texts,There and then, as if seeing with their own eyes, the great
ascetics practised asceticism.

1.15 There some prayed to Brahma; none suffered the frustration of losing his way;The soma,
at the right moment, was measured out; and nobody, at a random moment, came to nothing.

1.16 There, each disregarding his body, but having his own view with regard to dharma,And almost
bristling with zeal, the ascetics set about their ascetic practice of asceticism.

1.17 There the toiling sages, hearts straining heavenward,Seemed by their passion for asceticism
almost to do dharma a mischief.

1.18 Now, to that ashram, that seat of intensity, that domain of austerity,There came certain
sons of Ikṣvāku, royal princes, wishing to stay.

1.19 Tall they were like golden columns, lion-chested, strong-armed,Worthy of their great name
and royal insignia and good upbringing.

1.20 For deserving were they, where undeserving was he. Big-minded were they, where fickle-minded
was he.And bright were they, where brainless was he: their younger half-brother

1.21 The royal authority that had come to him, as his mother’s bride-price, they had not usurped;Rather,
keeping their father’s promise, they had retreated to the forest

1.22 The sage Kapila Gautama became their preceptor;And so, from the guru’s surname, those Kautsas
became Gautamas –

1.23 Just as, though they were brothers born of one father, because they had different gurusRāma
became a Gārgya and Vāsubhadra a Gautama.

1.24 And since they made a dwelling concealed among śāka trees,Therefore those descendants of
Ikṣvāku were known on earth as Śākyas.

1.25 Gautama performed services for them as for his own sons,Like the Bhārgava sage later did
for the child-prince Sagara;

1.26 Like Kaṇva did for Śākuntala’s son, the intrepid Bharata;And like the inspired Vālmīki
did for the inspired twin sons of Maithili.

1.27 That forest, through the sage, and through those warrior heroes,Radiated tranquillity and
security – the majesty of the brahmin and of the kṣatriya, in one yoke.

1.28 One day, while holding a jug of water, in his desire to nurture the princes’ growthThe
sage went up, into the air. Then he said to them:

1.29 “There will fall to earth from this flowing jug, whose flowing is unbreakable,A line of
drops: Do not overstep this mark, as in step you follow me.”

1.30 “Yes!" they said to this, and respectfully bowed, letting their heads fall forward.Then
all went up, onto chariots that were swiftly drawn, and well prepared.

1.31 So they followed him in the flow, while, walking on air,The ends of the earth of that ashram
he sprinkled with water.

1.32 He set out a plan like a chessboard, like an eightfold plan, revealed by signs;Then the
sage, standing still, spoke thus to those offspring of the guardians of the earth:

1.33 “Within this sprinkled line of drops, wherein your wheels have left a mark,You are to build
a city, when I am gone to heaven.”

1.34 Thereafter those lads, when in time the sage passed away,Roamed about in their unbridled
youth like elephants unchecked by a driver’s hook –

1.35 [They roamed about] with bows in hand and leather-clad fingers on arrows,Shafts causing
sizeable quivers to swell, feathers preened and fastened on.

1.36 Wishing to test their mettle among the elephants and big cats,They emulated the god-like
deeds of the forest-dwelling son of Duṣyanta.

1.37 Seeing their natural character emerge as those lads grew, like tiger cubs,The ascetics
abandoned that forest and retreated to the Himālayas.

1.38 Then, seeing the ashram [without ascetics,] desolate, the princes were desolate in their
hearts.In the red-hot anger of their indignation, they hissed like snakes.

1.39 In time, through good conduct, they came to a maturityIn which they could obtain the great
treasures that are disclosed through acts of knowing them.

1.40 Sufficient for full enjoyment of dharma, wealth, and pleasure;Abundant; and of many kinds:
these were treasures beyond the reach of enemies..

1.41 On the grounds of what they thus acquired, and of the fading influence of their past karma,They
who knew building, at that site, founded a splendid city.

1.42 It had a moat as broad as a river, a main street that straightened and curved,And great
ramparts rising like mountains, as if it were another Giri-vraja.

1.43 With its fine frontage of white watchtowers, and a well-apportioned central marketOverlooked
by crescents of large houses, it was like a Himālayan valley.

1.44 Brahmins versed in the Vedas and Vedāṅgas, and engaged in the six occupations,There they
caused to pray, for peace and for prosperity.

1.45 The regular soldiers they employed there to repel assailants from their territoryThey caused,
with their sovereign power, to be victorious in battle.

1.46 Householders of character and means, who were modest, far-sighted,Worthy, stout and able,
they caused to settle there..

1.47 Individuals possessed of particular strong points such as thinking, talking, and taking
steps,They installed in corresponding offices as counsellors and ministers.

1.48 Thronged by men who were wealthy but not wanton, and cultured but not conceited,[The city]
seemed like Mt. Mandara, thronged by kiṁnaras.

1.49 There with glad hearts, Desiring to bring joy to the citizens,They commissioned those glorious
abodes of beauty that we call ‘gardens’.

1.50 And lovely lotus pools of finest quality water,Not at anybody’s behest, but because of
being uplifted, they had dug in all directions.

1.51 Rest-houses of the first rank, welcoming and splendid, on the roads and in the woods,Complete
even with wells, they caused to go up on all sides.

1.52 Crowded with elephants, horses, and chariots, [the city] was crammed with people who did
not crowd each other.Material wealth was available to the needy, not secreted; but learning
and spirit ran secret and deep.

1.53 Like a place where goals converge, where energies are focused,Where learning activities
are housed together, and where achievements come together,

1.54 It was a homing tree for high flyers, a refuge for those seeking a place of rest,An arena
for those skilled in scientific endeavour, and a tethering post for the mighty.

1.55 By means of meetings, festivals, and acts of giving, and by means of traditional observances,The
heroes brought that city, the light of the world, to a glorious readiness

1.56 Since they never levied any tax that was not just,Therefore in a short time they caused
the city to be full.

1.57 And since, on the site of the ashram of the seer Kapila,They had built that city, therefore
it was called Kapilavāstu.

1.58 Just as cities sited on the ashrams of Kakanda, Makanda and KuśāmbaWere called after them,
so that city was called after Kapila.

1.59 Those equals of Indra took charge of that city with noble ardour but without arrogance;And
they thus took on forever the fragrance of honour, like the celebrated sons of Yayāti.

1.60 But under the sons of kings, active though they were as protectors, that kingless kingdom
lacked kingly lustre –Like the sky, though stars are shining in their thousands, before
the moon has risen.

1.61 So the senior among those brothers, in age and in merits, like the bull which is chief
among bulls in bodily power,They anointed there, attaching to the important, like the Ādityas
in heaven anointing thousand-eyed Indra.

1.62 Possessed of good conduct, discipline, prudence and industry,Bearing the big umbrella for
duty’s sake, not to pander to the power of the senses,He guarded that realm, surrounded
by his brothers,Like roaring Indra guarding heaven with his retinue of storm-gods.

The 1st Canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “A Portrait of Kapilavāstu.”

