10.1 Thus did he hear about Nanda’s desire to abandon sincere practice, to see his wife, and
to go home;And so the Sage summoned the joyless and weak-willed Nanda, wishing to take him
up.

10.2 When [Nanda], having not yet arrived at liberation’s path, arrived, he of the beautiful
mind questioned him, whose mind was faltering.Bowed down by humiliation, [Nanda] confessed
to the one who was full of humility; he told his intention to a master intention-knower.

10.3 And so the Sugata, the One Gone Well, seeing Nanda wandering in the darkness called “wife,”Took
his hand and flew up into the sky, wishing to take him up – like an honest man in
the water bearing up a pearl.

10.4 A shining gold they shone with their ochre robes, in the clear sky,Like a pair of greylag
geese rising up from a lake, embracing one another with outstretched wings.

10.5 Filled with the heady fragrance of the divine deodar, 03 full of rivers and lakes, and
springs and gulches,And filled with golden ore was the Himālayan mountain full of divine seers
at which the two arrived, immediately.

10.6 On that auspicious mountain – which was frequented by celestial singers and saints and
blanketed in smoke from burnt offerings –As if on an island in an unsupported sky, where no
far shore is reached, the two stood.

10.7 While the Sage, his sense-power stilled, remained there standing, Nanda looked all around
in amazementAt the caverns and bowers and forest-dwellers that were the mountain’s jewels
and its guardians.

10.8 For there on a great long horn of white rock, lay a peacock with its tail feathers arrayedSo
as to resemble, on the long and muscular arm of Bala, an armlet of cat’s-eye gems.

10.9 A lion with shoulders made orange from contact with the orange-red ore of ‘the mind-rock,’
arsenic,Looked like Āmbika’s crumpled armband of wrought silver streaked with refined
gold.

10.10 A tiger moved unhurriedly and expansively, its tail curling around its right [shoulder],As
it went to drink at a mountain spring: it looked like an offering to the ancestors, being
made by somebody who has arrived at water.

10.11 A yak had got stuck in a dangling kadamba tree swaying on the Himālayan hillside:Unable
to free its tangled tail, it was like a man of noble conduct who cannot break away from
a kindness that has been shown in his House.

10.12 Communities of golden mountain-men, the Kirātas, their limbs streaked with shining peacock
gall,Rushed out from their caves like flying tigers, as if spewed out of the unmoving
mountain.

10.13 Hanging out in nooks and crannies, and going beyond Beauty with their heart-stealing hips,
breasts and bellies,Were the bevies of kiṁnarīs who appeared in every quarter, like creepers
with flowers in their upward winding curls.

10.14 Pestering the godly deodars, monkeys roved from peak to peak;Obtaining from those trees
no fruit, they went away, as if from powerful masters whose favour is futile.

10.15 But lagging behind that troop was one whose face was red as pressed red resin –A female
monkey with one eye missing. Seeing her, the Sage spoke this to Nanda:

10.16 “Which, Nanda, in beauty and in manner, is the lovelier in your eyes:This one-eyed monkey,
or the person who is the focus of your wishing?”

10.17 Addressed thus by the One Gone Well, Nanda said, with a slight smirk:“How can a gap be
measured, Glorious One!, between that most excellent of women your sister-in-law, and this
tree-tormenting monkey?”

10.18 Then the Sage, hearing his protestation, and having in mind a slightly unconventional
means,Took hold of Nanda as before and proceeded to the pleasure-grove of the royal bearer
of the thunderbolt.

10.19 There one by one, season by season, and moment by moment, trees convey their individual
form;While some odd ones also bring out the combined manifold glory of all six seasons.

10.20 Some produce garlands and wreaths which are fragrant and affecting, with variously interwoven
strands,And small round creations suited to the ear which are akin to earrings’ opponents.

10.21 Trees there that abound in red lotuses look like trees ablaze.Different trees, growing
full-blown blue lotuses, seem to have their eyes open.

10.22 In various colourless hues, or else white; beautifully illuminated with golden dividing
lines;Beyond the weaving together of strands, being nothing but a unity; are the exquisite
robes that trees there bear as fruit.

10.23 Pearl necklaces and gemstones, supreme earrings, choicest armlets, and ankle bracelets,Are
the kinds of ornament, fit for heaven, that trees there bear as fruit.

10.24 There rise golden lotuses with beryl stems and diamond shoots and stamens;Receptive to
touch, they have a scent of the ultimate: still pools without ripples allow them to grow.

10.25 All kinds of musical instrument, with lengthened [sinews] and widened [skins], with open
tubes and solid substance,Are born there as fruit, by the distinctively bejewelled and
gilded trees which are the heaven-dwellers’ playing companions.

10.26 Over mandāra coral trees, and over trees weighed down with water-lily and ruddy lotus
blossoms,The ‘Full Grown’ Coral, shining there with majestic qualities, steps up and reigns
supreme.

10.27 Growing there, on soil tilled in Indra’s heaven by unwearying ploughs of austerity and
discipline,Are such trees as these, which are always adapting to provide for sky-dwellers’
enjoyment.

10.28 Birds there have bright red beaks, the colour of red ‘mind-rock’ arsenic; and crystalline
eyes;And wings a deathly shade of yellow, with intensely red tips; and claws as red as
red dye, but half white.

10.29 Birds which are – again – different, with distinctively golden wings and bright, beryl-blue
eyes,Birds called śiñjirikas fly to and fro, carrying away minds and ears with their
songs.

10.30 Adorned with curling feathers that are red at the tips, golden in the middle,And the colour
of beryl within borders, birds there move.

10.31 Winged ones of a different ilk, named rochiṣṇus, who have the lustre of a blazing fire,
their faces seeming to be aglow,Roam around, shaking views with their wonderful appearance,
and carrying apsarases away with their splendid sound.

10.32 There, merit-makers do whatever they like; constantly erect, they are free from pain,
free from aging, and beyond sorrow;Each by his actions inferior, superior, or in the middle,
each letting his own light shine, the merit-makers rejoice.

10.33 (EHJ: 10.34)Seeing that world to be in a perpetually elevated state, free from tiredness,
sleep, discontent, sorrow, and disease,Nanda deemed the ever-afflicted world of men, under
the sway of aging and death, to be akin to a cremation ground.

10.34 (EHJ: 10.35)Nanda beheld Indra’s forest all around him, his eyes wide open with amazement.And
the apsarases surrounded him, bristling with joyous excitement, while eyeing each
other haughtily.

10.35 (EHJ: 10.36)Eternally youthful and devoted purely to Love, the apsarases are zones of
recreation open to all who have made merit;They are the heavenly and innocent resort of gods,
their reward for ascetic practices.

10.36 (EHJ: 10.37)Odd ones among those women sang, in low and in high voices; some pulled lotuses
apart, playfully;Others in the same vein danced, bristling with mutual delight, limbs
making exotic gestures, breasts perturbing pearl necklaces.

10.37 (EHJ: 10.33)Here, having first accepted the price in austerities and made the decision
to splash out on heaven,Ascetics rich in austerities have their weary minds enthralled by
the flirting apsarases.

10.38 The faces of some of these women, ear-rings atremble, peeped through chinks in the undergrowthLike
duck-dunked lotuses peeping through scattered and displaced leaves.

10.39 When he saw them emerging from their forest niches like ribbons of lightning from rainclouds,Nanda’s
body trembled with passion like moonlight on rippling water.

10.40 Their heavenly form and playful gestures he then mentally seized;And, while his eye was
appropriated by curiosity, he became impassioned, as if from a thirst for union.

10.41 He became thirsty, desirous of drinking up the apsarases, afflicted by a pervading itch
to have them.Dragged along by the mind-chariot whose horse is the restless power of the
senses, he could not come to stillness.

10.42 For just as a man adds soda ash to dirty clothes and thereby makes them even dirtierNot
in order to increase dirt but in order to remove it, so the Sage had stirred the dust of
passion in Nanda.

10.43 Again, just as a healer who wishes to draw faults from the body would endeavour to aggravate
those faults,So, wishing to kill the red taint of passion in him, the Sage brought
about an even greater passion.

10.44 Just as a light in the dark is extinguished by the thousand-rayed brightness of the rising
sun,So the lovely radiance of women in the human world is put in the shade by the brilliance
of the celestial nymphs.

10.45 Great beauty blots out lesser beauty, a loud noise drowns out a small noise,And a severe
pain kills a mild pain – every great stimulus tends towards the extinction of a minor one.

10.46 And Nanda was able, relying on the power of the Sage, to endure that sight unendurable
to others.For the mind of a man lacking dispassion, when he was weak, would be burned up
by the apsarases’ shining splendour.

10.47 Deeming then that Nanda was roused to a new height of passion, his passion having turned
from love of his wife,And desiring to fight passion with passion, the dispassionate Sage
spoke these words:

10.48 “Look at these women who dwell in heaven and, having observed, truly tell the truth:Do
you think more of these women with their lovely form and excellent attributes or the one
upon whom your mind has been set?”

10.49 So, letting his gaze settle upon the apsarases, burning in his innermost heart with a
fire of passion,And stammering, with a mind stuck on objects of desire, Nanda joined his hands
like a beggar and spoke.

10.50 “Whatever difference there might be, Master, between that one-eyed she-monkey and your
sister-in-law,Is the same when your poor sister-in-law is set against the lovely apsarases.

10.51 For just as previously, when I beheld my wife, I had no interest in other women,So now
when I behold their beauty I have no interest in her.

10.52 Just as somebody who had been pained by mild sunshine might be consumed by a great fire,So
I who was previously toasted by a mild passion am now roasted by this blaze of passion.

10.53 Therefore pour on me the water of your voice, before I am burned, as was The Fishes’ Foe;For
a fire of passion is going now to burn me up, like a fire rising up to burn both undergrowth
and treetops.

10.54 Please, O Sage firm as the earth, I am sinking. Liberate me who am without firmness.I
shall give up my life, O Man of Liberated Mind, unless you extend to a dying man the deathless
nectar of your words.

10.55 For a snake whose coils are calamity, whose eyes are destruction, whose fangs are madness,
whose fiery venom is dark ignorance:The snake of love has bitten me in the heart. Therefore,
Great Healer, supply the antidote!

10.56 For nobody bitten by this snake of love remains anything but unsettled in himselfBewildered
was the mind of Vodhyu, whose essence had been immovability, while ‘Good-Body’ Śan-tanu,
who had been a sensible man, grew gaunt.

10.57 In you who abides conspicuously in the state of refuge, I seek refuge. So that I do not
wander through this world loafing in this place and that place;So that I might come to and
then go beyond that abode which is my adversity-ending end, please, repeatedly I plead
that you help me.”

10.58 Desiring to dispell that darkness in his heart like the moon dispersing the darkness that
rises by night,Then spoke the moon of great seers, the disperser of the world’s darkness,
the one devoid of darkness – Gautama:

10.59 “Embrace firmness, shake off indecision, get a grip of hearing and of heart, and listen!If
you desire these women practise now the utmost asceticism to pay their price.

10.60 For these women are conquered neither by force nor by service, neither by gifts nor by
good looks;They are mastered just by dharma-conduct. If aroused, practise dharma diligently.

10.61 Perching here in heaven with gods; delightful forests; ageless women –Such is the fruit
of your own pure action. It is not conferred by another; nor is it without cause.

10.62 Through strenuous efforts on earth – drawing a bow and suchlike – a man may sometimes
win women, or else he may not;But what is certain is that, through his practice of dharma
here and now, these women in heaven can belong to a man of meritorious action.

10.63 So delight in restraint, being attentive and ready, if you desire to secure the apsarases,And
I guarantee that, insofar as you persist in your observance, you certainly shall be
one with them.”

10.64 “From now on, I will!” he agreed. Believing intently in the supreme Sage, he had become
extremely determined.Then the Sage, gliding down from the sky like the wind, brought him
back down again to earth.

The 10th canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “A Vision of Heaven.”

