6.1 And so, with her husband riven away through his respect for the Guru, bereft of her happiness,
left joyless,Though she remained at the same spot, high up in the palace, Sundarī no
longer seemed to be herself.

6.2 Anticipating her husband’s approach, she leant forward, her breasts invading the bulls-eye
window.Expectantly she looked out from the palace roof towards the gateway, her earrings
dangling down across her face.

6.3 With her pearl necklaces hanging down, and straps dishevelled, as she bent down from the
palace,She looked like the most gorgeous of the heavenly nymphs (the apsarases) gazing from
her celestial abode at her lover, as he falls down, having used up his ascetic credit.

6.4 With a cold sweat on her beautiful brow, her face-paint drying in her sighs,And her eyes
restless with anxious thoughts, there she stood, suspecting her husband, somewhere else.

6.5 Tired out by a long time standing in that state, she dropped, just where she stood, onto
a couch,And lay across it with her necklaces scattered and a slipper half hanging off her
foot.

6.6 One of her women, not wishing to see Sundarī in such tearful distress,Was making her way
down from the palace penthouse, when she burst into tears, and made a commotion with her
feet on the stairs.

6.7 Hearing the sound on the stairs of that woman’s feet [Sundarī] quickly jumped up again;Transfixed
with joy, she bristled with excitement, believing it to be the approach of her beloved.

6.8 Scaring the pigeons in their rooftop roosts with the jangling of her ankle bracelets,She
dashed to the stairwell, without worrying, in her excitement, about what extremity of her
diaphonous raiments might be falling off.

6.9 On seeing the woman she was crestfallen; she sighed, threw herself again onto the couch,And
no longer shone: with her face suddenly 01 pallid she was as grey as a pale-mooned sky
in early winter.

6.10 Distressed at not seeing her husband, burning with desire and fury,She sat down with face
in hand and steeped herself in the river of worries, whose water is sorrow.

6.11 Her lotus-rivalling face, resting on the hennaed stem of her hand,Was like a lotus above
the reflection in the water of its mud-born self, drooping down.

6.12 She considered various possibilities, in accordance with a woman’s nature; then, failing
to see the truth that her husband had taken refuge in the dharma, while obviously still
impassioned and in love with her, she constructed various scenarios and uttered various laments:

6.13 “He promised me: ‘I’ll be back before your make-up is dry’;From what cause would such a
cherisher of promises as my beloved is, be now a breaker of promises?

6.14 In him who was noble, good, compassionate, always in awe of me, and all too honest,How
has such an unprecedented transformation come about? Through a loss of passion on his part?
From a mistake of mine?

6.15 The heart of my lover – lover of sexual pleasure and of me – has obviously waned in its
passion,For if he did still love me, having regard for my heart, he would not have failed
to return.

6.16 Another woman, then, in beauty and in nature better than me, my beloved has surely beheld;For,
having soothed me as he did with empty words, the guy has gone and left me, attached
to him as I am.

6.17 As for that devotion to Buddha of which he spoke, it was just a line to me for leaving;For
if he were clearly settled on the Sage he would fear untruth no less than a grisly death.

6.18 While I put my make-up on, he held the mirror as a service to me, and thought of another!If
he holds it now for that other so much for his fickle affection!

6.19 Any woman who does not wish to suffer grief like this should never trust a man.How could
he treat me before with such regard and then in a twinkling leave me like this, like anybody?”

6.20 This she said and more, love-lorn, and suspecting her love of loving another.Then the giddy
weeping woman, having dizzily climbed the palace stairs, tearfully told her these words:

6.21 “Though he may be young, good-looking, full of noble ancestry, and filled with charm and
fortune,Never did your husband cheat on you. You are being silly, and judging him amiss.

6.22 Ma’am! Do not accuse your loving husband, a doer of loving deeds who merits your love;He
never even looks at any woman other than you, like greylag gander with kindred greylag goose.

6.23 For you, he wished to stay at home; for your delight, he wished to live;But his noble brother,
the Tathāgata, so they say, has banished him, his face made wet by tears, into the
wandering life.

6.24 Then, on hearing what had happened to her husband, all of a sudden, up she leapt, shaking;She
clasped her arms and screamed out loud like a she-elephant shot in the heart by a poisoned
arrow.

6.25 Her eyes puffed-up and reddened by tears, the slender trunk of her body trembling with
anguish,She broke and scattered strings of pearls, as down she fell, like a mango branch weighed
down by too much fruit.

6.26 Wearing clothes suffused with lotus colours, with lotus face, and eyes as long as lotus
petals,She was like a Lotus-Hued Lakṣmī, who had fallen from her lotus [pedestal]. And she
withered like a lotus-garland left in the sun.

6.27 She thought and thought about her husband’s good points, sighing long and hard and gaspingAs
out she flung the arms that bore her gleaming jewels and [hennaed] hands, with reddened
fingertips.

6.28 “Now I don’t have any need for ornaments!” she cried, as she hurled her jewels in all directions.Unadorned
and drooping, she resembled a creeper shorn of blossoms.

6.29 She clasped the golden-handled mirror, and reflected, “My husband held this up for me.”And
the tamāla paint she had applied so carefully, she rubbed aggressively off her cheeks,
as if the paint had angered her.

6.30 Like a greylag goose, when a hawk has wounding talons on the gander’s wing, she hooted
mightily,As if in competition with the cooing pigeons on the palace roof, whose throats were
all atremble.

6.31 She lay down to sleep in soft and gorgeous bedclothes, on a bed bedecked with cats-eye
gems and diamonds,But in her costly crib with golden legs, she tossed and turned, and no respite
did she obtain.

6.32 She eyed her husband’s ornaments; his clothes, guitar and other items of amusement;Thus
she entered deeply into darkness: she raised a shriek, and then, as if descending into a
mire, sank down.

6.33 Her belly trembled out of breathlessness, like a cave being rent inside by fiery thunderbolts.As,
in her innermost heart, she burned with the fire of grief, Sundarī seemed at that
moment to be going out of her mind.

6.34 She howled, then wilted, screamed, then swooned; she reeled, stood rooted, wailed then
brooded.She vented anger and rended garlands; she scratched her face and slashed her clothes.

6.35 Hearing the howling of the lovely-toothed one – for O, how lovely were her teeth! – the
ladies-in-waiting suffered utmost torment;They climbed from inside the palace up to the roof,
like nervous kiṁnarīs ascending a mountain peak.

6.36 Their despondent faces wet with tears, like lotus ponds with rain-soaked lotus buds,They
settled down along with her, according to rank and as they wished, and along with her they
burned in grief.

6.37 On the palace roof, enfolded by her women, the slender Sundarī, gaunt with worry,Seemed
like a streak of crescent moon enshrouded among the autumn clouds by a hundred rays of lightning.

6.38 There was one among them there, however, who was senior in years, and good with words,
a well-respected woman:Holding Sundarī from behind in a firm embrace and wiping tears away,
she spoke as follows:

6.39 “Grief does ill become you, the wife of a royal seer, when your husband has taken refuge
in dharma;For in the lineage of Ikṣvāku, an ascetic forest is a desired inheritance

6.40 Well you know of wives of Śākya bulls gone forth in search of freedom:As a rule, they turn
their houses almost into ascetic groves and they observe the vow of chastity, as if it
were a pleasure.

6.41 If your husband had been stolen by another, due to her superior looks and qualities, then
tears you should let flow;For how could any beautiful and virtuous wife, who abounds in
excellence, refrain from shedding teardrops when her heart was broken?

6.42 Or had he met with some disaster – and may no such thing ever be! – then yes, tears;Because
there is no greater sorrow for a woman of noble birth who dignifies her husband as if
he were a god.

6.43 But on the contrary, he now is roving happily, meeting no disasters, but enjoying a healthy
and fruitful life.Free from eager longing, he is following dharma: at a time for celebration,
why are you in such a state of weeping consternation?”

6.44 Though this woman, with her [unctious] kindness, thus put forward many sorts of argument,
[Sundarī] could not be satisfied at all.Then another woman, with a sense of intimacy, said
what helped her mind and fit the occasion.

6.45 “Truly and categorically, I am telling you that soon enough you’ll see your husband back
again.Dispossessed of you, the fellow will survive out there no longer than living things
survive when dispossessed of consciousness.

6.46 Even in the lap of luxury he could not be happy, lacking you there by his side;And even
in the direst pickle, not a thing could trouble him, as long as you were in his sight.

6.47 Be happy. Don’t keep crying. Spare your eyes from shedding molten tears.The way he feels
for you, and his passion, are such that he, bereft of you, will find no pleasure in the
dharma.

6.48 Some might say that having worn the ochre robe, he won’t relinquish it, by dint of noble
birth combined with strength of character.But, he put it on unwillingly, while looking forward
to going home: what fault is there in taking it back off?”

6.49 Thus consoled by her little women when her husband had purloined her heart,Sundarī came
to earth, just as Rambhā, 08 with her heart turned towards Dramiḍa, came once upon a time,
enfolded in the midst of sister apsarases.

The 6th canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “A Wife’s Lament.”

