2.1 Some time thereafter that [realm] passed, through familial succession,To a king named Śuddodhana
who, being pure in his actions, had conquered the power of the senses.

2.2 Neither stuck in his desires nor conceited about gaining sovereignty,He did not, as he grew,
look down on others, and nor did he shrink from others in fear.

2.3 Strong and strong-minded; learned as well as intelligent,Daring and yet prudent; determined,
and cheerful with it,

2.4 He had a fine form without being stiff; was dexterous but not dishonest;Was energetic but
not impatient; and active but never flustered.

2.5 Challenged by his enemies in battle, and petitioned by friends,He was not backward in responding
with an intense energy, and with a willingness to give.

2.6 Wishing to tread the dutiful path of dharma trodden by previous kings,And bearing his kingship
like a call to total dedication, he emulated the ancestors through his conduct.

2.7 Due to his good governance, and under his protection, his subjects rested at ease,Free from
anxiety, as if in a father’s lap.

2.8 Whether skilled in use of book, or in use of sword; whether born into an eminent family,
or not;Anybody who came into his presence was seen to be useful.

2.9 When given good advice, however disagreeable, he listened and did not react;He let go of
a wrong done to him, however great, and remembered a service rendered, however small.

2.10 The meek and mild he befriended; tribal foes he apprehended;Sufferers he comprehended;
waverers he reprehended.

2.11 As the general rule in his dominion those influenced by his integritySeemed to take possession
of virtues as if they were securing treasures.

2.12 He minded the supreme sacred word; in fortitude, he never failed;He gave fitting gifts
to deserving recipients; and no evil did he do at all.

2.13 He resolutely carried out a promise undertaken, like a good horse carrying a load;For he
did not desire, apart from truthfulness, even a moment of life.

2.14 For the intellectually bright, he was there; with his own self-containment, he shone;And
on people in the directed state, he positively beamed – like the moon in the last month
of the rains.

2.15 Through intelligence and learning, he knew what was fitting, both in here and out there;He
guarded, with constancy and energy, both his senses and his subjects

2.16 He bore away the suffering of the oppressed and the boastful fame of the cruel,And covered
the earth with guiding principles and a much greater glory.

2.17 Seeing people suffering he overflowed with his original emotion as a man of compassion;But
he did not, through eager desire, undermine his honour by unprincipled acquisition of
treasured objects.

2.18 In his kind-hearted iron devotion even to imperfect friends,He had no will to take, but
willingly gave, cheerful-faced, to each according to his need.

2.19 Without offering the first portion to revered beings, and without bathing, he did not eat
anything;Neither did he milk the earth unjustly, as a cow is milked by a man thirsting
for milk.

2.20 He never scattered the food offering except when due; he never developed lordly arrogance;Committing
of the scriptures to his mind, he did for dharma, not for praise.

2.21 A few doers of harsh deeds, though they deserved harsh treatment, he did not treat harshly;And
due to his noble nature he never cast a veil over the virtues of a true man, even
one who defied him.

2.22 With his fine form he ripped away, as does the moon, people’s views;He never touched, in
an act of becoming, what belonged to others, any more than he would touch a venomous snake
slithering on the earth.

2.23 Nowhere in his dominion did anyone hurt by anyone lament;For the bow in his hand bestowed
peace upon the afflicted.

2.24 Even those who transgressed, if they were submissive (and before them, of course, those
who acted agreeably),He surveyed with an affectionate eye, and steeped in loving speech

2.25 He studied many subjects without being interested in objects;Abiding in dharma as it was
in the golden age, he did not drift, even in a predicament, from dharma.

2.26 Because of his virtues, he continually grew; in his joy at the success of friends, he kept
growing;In the stream of forebears long since grown old, again he kept going… but go he
did not, on a blameworthy path.

2.27 He quietened his enemies, using arrows; he gladdened his friends, using virtues;His servants,
when there were faults, he did not goad; the offshoots who were his subjects he did
not, with doing hands, overtax.

2.28 Under his protection, and because of his heroism, seeds were planted over the whole earth;And
by the transparent working of his judicial system, sessions were sat into the dark
stillness of night.

2.29 By the conduct of a royal seer, he propagated through his house the fragrance of honour;Like
the son of Aditi shining light into darkness, he with the intensity of his energy caused
the enemies to scatter.

2.30 Using virtues that befitted a good son, he caused the ancestors, again, to disseminate
their light;And, like a raincloud using rain, he enlivened his offshoots, his subjects, using
conduct.

2.31 With inexhaustible and great acts of giving, he caused the brahmins to press out their
soma;And by dutifully adhering to his kingly dharma, he caused corn, at the right moment,
to ripen.

2.32 He talked no talk that went against dharma, being free in himself of doubts and questions;And,
like a wheel-rolling king, he caused others to be courageous in service of dharma.

2.33 No special tribute did he cause the kingdom to pay him;But with sustained endeavour, and
using only regulars, he caused enemy pride to be cut down.

2.34 Again and again, he caused his own house to be pure, using just his own virtues;At the
same time, he did not let his offshoots decay, for all were established in all dharmas.

2.35 A man of tireless sacrifice when the time was right, he caused sacrificial ground to be
measured out;And he enabled twice-born men, who under his protection were unburdened by anxiety,
to know the weight of the sacred word.

2.36 In the presence of gurus, and obeying the rule, he caused the soma to be measured out on
time, as a cool, mild man of soma,And yet, with intense ardour, with fiery energy, he saw
the enemy army cut down to size.

2.37 As knower of the dharma that is paramount, he caused his offshoots to abide in dharma in
a small way,And yet caused them, because of experiencing dharma, to let heaven wait.

2.38 Even the obvious candidate in a crisis, he did not appoint if it went against dharma;Nor,
out of nothing more than fondness, did he dotingly promote incompetence.

2.39 With his intense energy and his light he exposed to view his enemies, the conceited;And
with the blazing lantern of his brightness, he caused the world to shine.

2.40 He gave out of kindness, not for his glorification, and always to meet a need;Giving up
even a thing of great substance, he mentioned nothing of it.

2.41 He did not shun one afflicted by suffering, even an enemy, who had taken refuge;And having
conquered his enemies, the conceited, he did not become proud on that account.

2.42 No rule did he break, out of love, hate, or fear;Even while abiding in pleasurable circumstances,
he did not remain in thrall to the power of the senses.

2.43 He was never seen to do shoddily anywhere that needed to be done;When required by friend
and non-friend to act, he did not fall into inaction.

2.44 He drank and guarded, as prescribed, the soma and his honour;And he was constantly mindful
of the Vedas, as well as the dharma proclaimed in the Vedas.

2.45 Not eschewed by such uncommon virtues as theseWas he who on no side could be vanquished
– the unshakable Śākya King, like Śakra.

2.46 Now at that time Dharma-loving denizens of the heavensMoved into the orbit of the human
world, wishing to investigate dharma movements.

2.47 Those essences of dharma, moving, with the desire to know dharma, over the earth,Saw that
leader of men whose essence was particularly given over to dharma.

2.48 Then the bodhisattva came down to earth, and rather than among Tuṣita gods,He put down
birth-roots in the family of that earth-lord.

2.49 That man-god at that time had a goddess, A queen whose name was Māyā;She was as devoid
of anger, darkness and the māyā which is deceit as was the goddess Māyā in heaven.

2.50 In a dream during that period she saw entering her wombA white six-tusked elephant, mighty
as Airāvata.

2.51 When they heard this dream, brahmins who knew dreams predictedThe birth of a prince who
would bring honour, through wealth or through dharma.

2.52 At the birth of this exceptional being whose mission was the end of re-birthThe earth with
its immoveable mountains moved, like a boat being battered by waves.

2.53 A rain of flowers, unwilted by the sun’s rays, fell from the skyAs if shaken from the trees
of Citra-ratha’s forest by the trunks of the elephants of the four quarters.

2.54 Drums sounded in heaven, as though the storm-gods were rolling dice;The sun blazed inestimably,
and the wind blew benignly.

2.55 Gods in Tuṣita Heaven became calm and content, as did gods of the clear Śuddhāvāsa yonder,Through
thinking highly of true dharma and through fellow feeling among sentient beings.

2.56 To one who was a lamp of honour came a supreme bringer of the brightness of betterment:He
shone with tranquil splendour like dharma in a separate bodily form.

2.57 To the king’s younger queen, also, ;ike fire in the notch of a fire-board,A son was born
named Nanda, Joy, a bringer of constant joy to his family.

2.58 Long in the arm, broad in the chest, with shoulders of a lion and eyes of a bull,He because
of his superlative looks bore the epithet “handsome.”

2.59 Like a first month in spring having arrived, like a new moon having risen;Again, like the
non-physical having taken a physical form, he radiated sheer loveliness.

2.60 The king with exceeding gladness brought up the two of them,As great wealth in the hands
of a good man promotes dharma and pleasure.

2.61 Those two good sons, in time, grew up to do the king proud,Just as, when his investment
is great, dharma and wealth pay a noble person well.

2.62 Being in the middle, with regard to those two good sons, the Śākya king reigned resplendent,Like
the Madhya-deśa, the Middle Region, adorned by the Himālaya and Pāriyātra mountains.

2.63 Then, gradually, those two sons of the king became educated, in practical arts and in learning.Nanda
frittered all his time on idle pleasures; but Sarvārtha-siddha, Accomplisher
of Every Aim, was not mottled by the redness of passions.

2.64 For he had seen for himself an old man, a sick man, and a corpse,After which, as with a
wounded mind he witnessed the unwitting world,He was disgusted to the core and found no pleasure
in objectsBut wished totally to terminate the terror of being born and dying.

2.65 Having focused his agitated mind on the end of becoming,He fled the king’s palace, indifferent
to the most beautiful of women sleeping there;Determined to go to the forest, he fled
in the night,Like a goose from a lake of ruined lotuses.

The 2nd canto in the epic poem Handsome Nanda, titled “A Portrait of the King.”

